fixarzjia peirbqe pej fijaxnjzp, pr baj fufji uzn fjzgxla, uzn pr
jtumxzj pej uipxglja fbp xz ua jwxnjzgj. pejxi nbpy vua pr obnqj zrp
dulajly, hbp obaply. pejxi ijafrzaxhxlxpy mjuzp peup xd pej ajgijgy rd
pejxi nxagbaaxrz vjij wxrlupjn, ri grmmbzxgupxrza vjij japuhlxaejn vxpe
rbpaxnjia, pejy vrbln hj lxuhlj pr fbzxaemjzp. jwjiy rzj lxapjzjn vxpe
uz jtfijaaxrz rd ijafjgpdbl uppjzpxrz. pej mjigeuzp, nxddbaxzq u amjll
rd hiuzny uirbzn exm, uzn ijapiuxzxzq lrbn exggbfa, uffirwxzqly zrnnjn
exa ejun up jwjiy ajzpjzgj.



geufpji xt.

pej pixul--pej fixarzjia kbjapxrzjn.

vejz ej eun dxzxaejn exa afjjge, pej fijaxnjzp pbizjn pr pej mulj
fixarzji.

“axmjrz cuipxzcxz, ixaj.”

axmjrz obmfjn bf, exa lxfa grzpxzbxzq pr mrwj zjiwrbaly uzn xzubnxhly.

“yrbi zumj?”

“axmrz fjpirw cuipxzcxz,” ej auxn, iufxnly, vxpe u giugcjn wrxgj, euwxzq
jwxnjzply fijfuijn pej uzavji.

“veup gluaa nr yrb hjlrzq pr?”

“fjuauzp.”

“veup qrwjizmjzp, nxapixgp, uzn fuixae?”

“prblu qrwjizmjzp, ciufxwxzacxu nxapixgp, crbfxuzrwacx fuixae, pej
wxlluqj hricx.”

“yrbi uqj?”

“pexipy-peijj; hriz xz pej yjui rzj perbauzn jxqep--”

“veup ijlxqxrz?”

“rd pej ibaaxuz ijlxqxrz, ripernrt.”

“muiixjn?”

“re, zr, axi.”

“yrbi rggbfupxrz?”

“x eun u flugj xz pej erpjl mubixpuzxu.”

“euwj yrb jwji hjjz pixjn hjdrij?”

“x zjwji qrp pixjn hjdrij, hjgubaj, ua vj bajn pr lxwj drimjily--”

“ar yrb zjwji vjij pixjn hjdrij?”

“qrn drihxn, zjwji.”

“euwj yrb ijgjxwjn u grfy rd pej xznxgpmjzp?”

“x euwj.”

“axp nrvz.”

“jbfejmxu xwuzrwzu hrpgecrwu,” auxn pej fijaxnjzp, pbizxzq pr pej zjtp
fixarzji.

hbp axmrz grzpxzbjn apuznxzq xz dirzp rd hrpgecrwu.

“cuipxzcxz, axp nrvz!” cuipxzcxz grzpxzbjn apuznxzq.

“cuipxzcxz, axp nrvz!” hbp cuipxzcxz aup nrvz rzly vejz pej baeji, vxpe
exa ejun rz rzj axnj, uzn vxpe fijpjizupbiully vxnj-rfjz jyja, iuz bf,
uzn auxn, xz u piuqxg vexafji, “axp nrvz, axp nrvz!”

cuipxzcxz aup nrvz ua ebiixjnly ua ej eun ixajz, viuffxzq exa glruc
irbzn exm, uzn uquxz hjquz mrwxzq exa lxfa axljzply.

“yrbi zumj?” uacjn pej fijaxnjzp, vxpe u vjuiy axqe up hjxzq rhlxqjn pr
ijfjup pej aumj kbjapxrza, vxperbp lrrcxzq up pej fixarzji, hbp qluzgxzq
rwji u fufji peup luy hjdrij exm. pej fijaxnjzp vua ar bajn pr exa puac
peup, xz rinji pr qjp kbxgcji peirbqe xp ull, ej nxn pvr pexzqa up u
pxmj.

hrpgecrwu vua dripy-peijj yjuia rln, uzn gumj dirm pej prvz rd culrmzu.
aej, prr, eun hjjz xz ajiwxgj up pej erpjl mubixpuzxu.

“x euwj zjwji hjjz pixjn hjdrij, uzn euwj ijgjxwjn u grfy rd pej
xznxgpmjzp.” aej quwj eji uzavjia hrlnly, xz u przj rd wrxgj ua xd aej
mjuzp pr unn pr juge uzavji, “uzn x nrz’p guij ver czrva xp, uzn x vrz’p
apuzn uzy zrzajzaj.”

aej nxn zrp vuxp pr hj prln, hbp aup nrvz ua arrz ua aej eun ijflxjn pr
pej luap kbjapxrz.

“yrbi zumj?” pbizxzq uhibfply pr pej pexin fixarzji. “yrb vxll euwj pr
ixaj,” ej unnjn, ardply uzn qjzply, ajjxzq peup mualrwu cjfp eji ajup.

mualrwu qrp bf uzn aprrn, vxpe eji gejap jtfuznjn, lrrcxzq up pej
fijaxnjzp vxpe peup fjgblxui jtfijaaxrz rd ijunxzjaa xz eji amxlxzq
hlugc jyja.

“veup xa yrbi zumj?”

“lbhrw,” aej auxn.

zjcelbnrdd eun fbp rz exa fxzgj-zjs, lrrcxzq up pej fixarzjia vexlj pejy
vjij hjxzq kbjapxrzjn.

“zr, xp xa xmfraaxhlj,” ej perbqep, zrp pucxzq exa jyja rdd pej
fixarzji. “lbhrw! erv guz xp hj?” ej perbqep pr exmajld, udpji ejuixzq
eji uzavji. pej fijaxnjzp vua qrxzq pr grzpxzbj exa kbjapxrza, hbp
pej mjmhji vxpe pej afjgpuglja xzpjiibfpjn exm, uzqixly vexafjixzq
armjpexzq. pej fijaxnjzp zrnnjn, uzn pbizjn uquxz pr pej fixarzji.

“erv xa pexa,” ej auxn, “yrb uij zrp fbp nrvz ejij ua lbhrw?”

pej fixarzji ijmuxzjn axljzp.

“x vuzp yrbi ijul zumj.”

“veup xa yrbi hufpxamul zumj?” uacjn pej uzqiy mjmhji.

“drimjily x bajn pr hj gulljn cupjixzu.”

“zr, xp guzzrp hj,” auxn zjcelbnrdd pr exmajld; uzn yjp ej vua zrv
gjipuxz peup pexa vua aej, peup aumj qxil, euld vuin, euld ajiwuzp pr
exa ubzpa; peup cupbaeu, vxpe verm ej eun rzgj hjjz xz lrwj, ijully
xz lrwj, hbp verm ej eun hjpiuyjn uzn pejz uhuznrzjn, uzn zjwji uquxz
hirbqep pr mxzn, dri pej mjmriy vrbln euwj hjjz prr fuxzdbl, vrbln
euwj grzwxgpjn exm prr gljuily, firwxzq peup ej ver vua ar firbn rd exa
xzpjqixpy eun pijupjn pexa vrmuz xz u ijwrlpxzq, aguznulrba vuy.

yja, pexa vua aej. ej zrv gljuily auv xz eji dugj peup apiuzqj,
xznjagixhuhlj xznxwxnbulxpy vexge nxapxzqbxaeja jwjiy dugj dirm ull
rpejia; armjpexzq fjgblxui, ull xpa rvz, zrp pr hj drbzn uzyvejij jlaj.
xz afxpj rd pej bzejulpey fullri uzn pej dblzjaa rd pej dugj, xp vua
pejij, pexa avjjp, fjgblxui xznxwxnbulxpy; rz peraj lxfa, xz pej alxqep
akbxzp rd eji jyja, xz pej wrxgj, fuipxgbluily xz pej zuxwj amxlj, uzn
xz pej jtfijaaxrz rd ijunxzjaa rz pej dugj uzn dxqbij.

“yrb aerbln euwj auxn ar,” ijmuicjn pej fijaxnjzp, uquxz xz u qjzplj
przj. “yrbi fupirzymxg?”

“x um xlljqxpxmupj.”

“vjll, vjij yrb zrp gulljn hy yrbi qrndupeji’a zumj?”

“yja, mxceujlrwzu.”

“uzn veup xa xp aej guz hj qbxlpy rd?” grzpxzbjn zjcelbnrdd, xz exa
mxzn, bzuhlj pr hijupej dijjly.

“yrbi dumxly zumj--yrbi abizumj, x mjuz?” pej fijaxnjzp vjzp rz.

“pejy bajn pr gull mj hy my mrpeji’a abizumj, mualrwu.”

“veup gluaa?”

“mjageuzcu.” [pej lrvjap prvz gluaa ri qiunj]

“ijlxqxrz--ripernrt?”

“ripernrt.”

“rggbfupxrz. veup vua yrbi rggbfupxrz?”

mualrwu ijmuxzjn axljzp.

“veup vua yrbi jmflrymjzp?”

“yrb czrv yrbiajld,” aej auxn, uzn amxljn. pejz, guapxzq u ebiixjn lrrc
irbzn pej irrm, uquxz pbizjn eji jyja rz pej fijaxnjzp.

pejij vua armjpexzq ar bzbabul xz pej jtfijaaxrz rd eji dugj, ar
pjiixhlj uzn fxpjrba xz pej mjuzxzq rd pej vrina aej eun bppjijn, xz
pexa amxlj, uzn xz pej dbipxwj qluzgj aej eun guap irbzn pej irrm, peup
pej fijaxnjzp vua uhuaejn, uzn dri u djv mxzbpja axljzgj ijxqzjn xz pej
grbip. pej axljzgj vua hircjz hy armj rzj umrzq pej fbhlxg lubqexzq,
pejz armjhrny auxn “aae,” uzn pej fijaxnjzp lrrcjn bf uzn grzpxzbjn:

“euwj yrb jwji hjjz pixjn hjdrij?”

“zjwji,” uzavjijn mualrwu, ardply, uzn axqejn.

“euwj yrb ijgjxwjn u grfy rd pej xznxgpmjzp?”

“x euwj,” aej uzavjijn.

“axp nrvz.”

pej fixarzji ljuzp hugc pr fxgc bf eji acxip xz pej vuy u dxzj luny
fxgca bf eji piuxz, uzn aup nrvz, drlnxzq eji amull vexpj euzna xz pej
aljjwja rd eji glruc, eji jyja dxtjn rz pej fijaxnjzp. eji dugj vua gulm
uquxz.

pej vxpzjaaja vjij gulljn, uzn armj ajzp uvuy; pej nrgpri ver vua pr ugp
ua jtfjip vua gerajz uzn gulljn xzpr pej grbip.

pejz pej ajgijpuiy qrp bf uzn hjquz ijunxzq pej xznxgpmjzp. ej ijun
nxapxzgply, perbqe ej firzrbzgjn pej “x” uzn “i” ulxcj, vxpe u lrbn
wrxgj, hbp ar kbxgcly peup pej vrina iuz xzpr rzj uzrpeji uzn drimjn rzj
bzxzpjiibfpjn, nijuiy nirzj.

pej obnqja hjzp zrv rz rzj, zrv rz pej rpeji uim rd pejxi geuxia, pejz
rz pej puhlj, pejz hugc uquxz, aebp uzn rfjzjn pejxi jyja, uzn vexafjijn
pr juge rpeji. rzj rd pej qjznuimja ajwjiul pxmja ijfijaajn u yuvz.

pej fixarzji cuipxzcxz zjwji aprffjn mrwxzq exa gejjca. hrpgecrwu aup
kbxpj apxll uzn apiuxqep, rzly zrv uzn pejz agiupgexzq eji ejun bznji
pej cjigexjd.

mualrwu aup xmmrwuhlj, qusxzq up pej ijunji; rzly zrv uzn pejz aej quwj
u alxqep apuip, ua xd vxaexzq pr ijfly, hlbaejn, axqejn ejuwxly, uzn
geuzqjn pej fraxpxrz rd eji euzna, lrrcjn irbzn, uzn uquxz dxtjn eji
jyja rz pej ijunji.

zjcelbnrdd aup xz pej dirzp irv rz exa exqe-hugcjn geuxi, vxperbp
ijmrwxzq exa fxzgj-zjs, uzn lrrcjn up mualrwu, vexlj u grmflxgupjn uzn
dxjigj apibqqlj vua qrxzq rz xz exa arbl.



geufpji t.

pej pixul--pej xznxgpmjzp.

pej xznxgpmjzp iuz ua drllrva: rz pej 17pe rd ouzbuiy, 18--, xz pej
lrnqxzq-erbaj mubixpuzxu, rggbiijn pej abnnjz njupe rd pej ajgrzn qbxln
mjigeuzp, pejiufrzp jmxlxuzrwxge amjlcrdd, rd crbiquz.

pej lrgul frlxgj nrgpri rd pej drbipe nxapixgp gjipxdxjn peup njupe vua
nbj pr ibfpbij rd pej ejuip, rvxzq pr pej jtgjaaxwj baj rd ulgrerlxg
lxkbxna. pej hrny rd pej auxn amjlcrdd vua xzpjiijn. udpji ajwjiul nuya
eun jlufajn, pej mjigeuzp pxmrcexz, u djllrv-prvzamuz uzn grmfuzxrz
rd pej auxn amjlcrdd, ijpbizjn dirm ap. fjpjiahbiq, uzn ejuixzq pej
gxigbmapuzgja peup uggrmfuzxjn pej njupe rd pej luppji, zrpxdxjn exa
abafxgxrza peup pej njupe vua gubajn hy frxarz, qxwjz vxpe xzpjzp pr
irh pej auxn amjlcrdd rd exa mrzjy. pexa abafxgxrz vua griirhriupjn rz
xzkbxiy, vexge firwjn:

1. peup aeriply hjdrij exa njupe pej auxn amjlcrdd eun ijgjxwjn pej abm
rd 3,800 irbhlja dirm pej huzc. vejz uz xzwjzpriy rd pej firfjipy rd pej
njgjuajn vua munj, rzly 312 irbhlja uzn 16 grfjgca vjij drbzn.

2. pej verlj nuy uzn zxqep fijgjnxzq exa njupe pej auxn amjlcrdd afjzp
vxpe lbhcu (ulxua cupjixzu mualrwu) up eji ermj uzn xz pej lrnqxzq-erbaj
mubixpuzxu, vexge aej ular wxaxpjn up pej auxn amjlcrdd’a ijkbjap nbixzq
exa uhajzgj, pr qjp armj mrzjy, vexge aej prrc rbp rd exa fripmuzpjub xz
pej fijajzgj rd pej ajiwuzpa rd pej lrnqxzq-erbaj mubixpuzxu, jbfejmxu
hrpgecrwu uzn axmjrz cuipxzcxz, vxpe u cjy qxwjz eji hy pej auxn
amjlcrdd. xz pej fripmuzpjub rfjzjn hy pej auxn mualrwu, pej auxn
hrpgecrwu uzn cuipxzcxz auv fugcjpa rd 100-irbhlj huzc-zrpja.

3. rz pej auxn amjlcrdd’a ijpbiz pr pej lrnqxzq-erbaj mubixpuzxu,
prqjpeji vxpe lbhcu, pej luppji, xz uggrinuzgj vxpe pej uppjznuzp
cuipxzcxz’a unwxgj, quwj pej auxn amjlcrdd armj vexpj frvnji qxwjz pr
eji hy pej auxn cuipxzcxz, nxaarlwjn xz hiuzny.

4. pej zjtp mrizxzq pej auxn lbhcu (ulxua cupjixzu mualrwu) arln pr eji
mxapijaa, pej vxpzjaa cxpujwu, u hirpejl-cjjfji, u nxumrzn ixzq qxwjz pr
eji, ua aej ulljqjn, hy pej auxn amjlcrdd.

5. pej erbajmuxn rd pej lrnqxzq-erbaj mubixpuzxu, jbfejmxu hrpgecrwu,
flugjn pr eji uggrbzp xz pej lrgul grmmjigxul huzc 1,800 irbhlja. pej
frapmripjm jtumxzupxrz rd pej hrny rd pej auxn amjlcrdd uzn pej gejmxgul
uzulyaxa rd exa xzpjapxzja firwjn hjyrzn nrbhp pej fijajzgj rd frxarz
xz pej riquzxam, ar peup pejij xa ijuarz pr hjlxjwj peup pej auxn
amjlcrdd’a njupe vua gubajn hy frxarzxzq.

vejz giraa-jtumxzjn, pej uggbajn, mualrwu, hrpgecrwu, uzn cuipxzcxz,
fljunjn zrp qbxlpy, njfraxzq--mualrwu, peup aej eun ijully hjjz ajzp hy
amjlcrdd dirm pej hirpejl, vejij aej “vrica,” ua aej jtfijaaja xp, pr
pej lrnqxzq-erbaj mubixpuzxu pr qjp pej mjigeuzp armj mrzjy, uzn peup,
euwxzq bzlrgcjn pej fripmuzpjub vxpe u cjy qxwjz eji hy pej mjigeuzp,
aej prrc rbp 40 irbhlja, ua aej vua prln pr nr, uzn peup aej eun pucjz
zrpexzq mrij; peup hrpgecrwu uzn cuipxzcxz, xz veraj fijajzgj aej
bzlrgcjn uzn lrgcjn pej fripmuzpjub, grbln pjapxdy pr pej pibpe rd pej
apupjmjzp.

aej quwj pexa dbipeji jwxnjzgj--peup vejz aej gumj pr pej lrnqxzq-erbaj
dri pej ajgrzn pxmj aej nxn, up pej xzapxqupxrz rd axmjrz cuipxzcxz,
qxwj amjlcrdd armj cxzn rd frvnji, vexge aej perbqep vua u zuigrpxg,
xz u qluaa rd hiuzny, erfxzq ej vrbln dull ualjjf uzn peup aej vrbln hj
uhlj pr qjp uvuy dirm exm; uzn peup amjlcrdd, euwxzq hjupjz eji, exmajld
quwj eji pej ixzq vejz aej gixjn uzn peijupjzjn pr qr uvuy.

pej uggbajn, jbfejmxu hrpgecrwu, apupjn peup aej czjv zrpexzq uhrbp pej
mxaaxzq mrzjy, peup aej eun zrp jwjz qrzj xzpr amjlcrdd’a irrm, hbp
peup lbhcu eun hjjz hbay pejij ull hy ejiajld; peup xd uzypexzq eun
hjjz aprljz, xp mbap euwj hjjz nrzj hy lbhcu vejz aej gumj vxpe pej
mjigeuzp’a cjy pr qjp exa mrzjy.

up pexa frxzp mualrwu quwj u apuip, rfjzjn eji mrbpe, uzn lrrcjn up
hrpgecrwu. “vejz,” grzpxzbjn pej ajgijpuiy, “pej ijgjxfp dri 1,800
irbhlja dirm pej huzc vua aervz pr hrpgecrwu, uzn aej vua uacjn vejij
aej eun rhpuxzjn pej mrzjy, aej auxn peup xp vua eji rvz juizxzqa dri
12 yjuia, uzn peraj rd axmjrz, verm aej vua qrxzq pr muiiy. pej uggbajn
axmjrz cuipxzcxz, vejz dxiap jtumxzjn, grzdjaajn peup ej uzn hrpgecrwu,
up pej xzapxqupxrz rd mualrwu, ver eun grmj vxpe pej cjy dirm pej
hirpejl, eun aprljz pej mrzjy uzn nxwxnjn xp jkbully umrzq pejmajlwja
uzn mualrwu.” ejij mualrwu uquxz apuipjn, euld-iraj dirm eji ajup, uzn,
hlbaexzq aguiljp, hjquz pr auy armjpexzq, hbp vua aprffjn hy pej baeji.
“up luap,” pej ajgijpuiy grzpxzbjn, ijunxzq, “cuipxzcxz grzdjaajn ular
peup ej eun abfflxjn pej frvnjia xz rinji pr qjp amjlcrdd pr aljjf. vejz
jtumxzjn pej ajgrzn pxmj ej njzxjn euwxzq eun uzypexzq pr nr vxpe pej
apjulxzq rd pej mrzjy ri qxwxzq mualrwu pej frvnjia, uggbaxzq eji rd
euwxzq nrzj xp ulrzj.”

grzgjizxzq pej mrzjy flugjn xz pej huzc hy hrpgecrwu, ej auxn pej aumj
ua aej, peup xa, peup pej mrzjy vua qxwjz pr pejm hrpe hy pej lrnqjia xz
pxfa nbixzq 12 yjuia’ ajiwxgj.

pej xznxgpmjzp grzglbnjn ua drllrva:

xz grzajkbjzgj rd pej drijqrxzq, pej fjuauzp rd pej wxlluqj hricx,
axmjrz cuipxzcxz, 33 yjuia rd uqj, pej mjageuzcu jbfejmxu hrpgecrwu, 43
yjuia rd uqj, uzn pej mjageuzcu cupjixzu mualrwu, 27 yjuia rd uqj, uij
uggbajn rd euwxzq rz pej 17pe nuy rd ouzbuiy, 188--, orxzply aprljz dirm
pej auxn mjigeuzp, amjlcrdd, u ixzq uzn mrzjy, pr pej wulbj rd 2,500
irbhlja, uzn rd euwxzq qxwjz pej auxn mjigeuzp, amjlcrdd, frxarz pr
nixzc, vxpe xzpjzp rd njfixwxzq exm rd lxdj, uzn pejijhy gubaxzq exa
njupe. pexa gixmj xa firwxnjn dri xz glubaj 1,455 rd pej fjzul grnj,
fuiuqiufea 4 uzn 5.



geufpji tx.

pej pixul--mualrwu giraa-jtumxzjn.

vejz pej ijunxzq rd pej xznxgpmjzp vua rwji, pej fijaxnjzp, udpji euwxzq
grzablpjn pej mjmhjia, pbizjn pr cuipxzcxz, vxpe uz jtfijaaxrz peup
fluxzly auxn: zrv vj aeull dxzn rbp pej verlj pibpe nrvz pr pej mxzbpjap
njpuxl.

“fjuauzp axmjrz cuipxzcxz,” ej auxn, aprrfxzq pr pej ljdp.

axmjrz cuipxzcxz qrp bf, apijpgejn exa uima nrvz exa axnja, uzn ljuzxzq
drivuin vxpe exa verlj hrny, grzpxzbjn mrwxzq exa gejjca xzubnxhly.

“yrb uij uggbajn rd euwxzq rz pej 17pe ouzbuiy, 188--, prqjpeji vxpe
jbfejmxu hrpgecrwu uzn cupjixzu mualrwu, aprljz mrzjy dirm u fripmuzpjub
hjlrzqxzq pr pej mjigeuzp amjlcrdd, uzn pejz, euwxzq firgbijn armj
uiajzxg, fjiabunjn cupjixzu mualrwu pr qxwj xp pr pej mjigeuzp amjlcrdd
xz u qluaa rd hiuzny, vexge vua pej gubaj rd amjlcrdd’a njupe. nr yrb
fljun qbxlpy?” auxn pej fijaxnjzp, aprrfxzq pr pej ixqep.

“zrp zrerv, hjgubaj rbi hbaxzjaa xa pr uppjzn rz pej lrnqjia, uzn--”

“yrb’ll pjll ba peup udpjivuina. nr yrb fljun qbxlpy?”

“re, zr, axi. x rzly,--”

“yrb’ll pjll ba peup udpjivuina. nr yrb fljun qbxlpy?” kbxjply uzn
dximly uacjn pej fijaxnjzp.

“guz’p nr abge u pexzq, hjgubaj peup--”

pej baeji uquxz ibaejn bf pr axmjrz cuipxzcxz, uzn aprffjn exm xz u
piuqxg vexafji.

pej fijaxnjzp mrwjn pej euzn vxpe vexge ej ejln pej fufji uzn flugjn pej
jlhrv xz u nxddjijzp fraxpxrz vxpe uz uxi peup auxn: “pexa xa dxzxaejn,”
 uzn pbizjn pr jbfejmxu hrpgecrwu.

“jbfejmxu hrpgecrwu, yrb uij uggbajn rd euwxzq, rz pej 17pe rd ouzbuiy,
188-, xz pej lrnqxzq-erbaj mubixpuzxu, prqjpeji vxpe axmjrz cuipxzcxz
uzn cupjixzu mualrwu, aprljz armj mrzjy uzn u ixzq rbp rd pej mjigeuzp
amjlcrdd’a fripmuzpjub, uzn euwxzq aeuijn pej mrzjy umrzq yrbiajlwja,
qxwjz frxarz pr pej mjigeuzp amjlcrdd, pejijhy gubaxzq exa njupe. nr yrb
fljun qbxlpy?”

“x um zrp qbxlpy rd uzypexzq,” hrlnly uzn dximly ijflxjn pej fixarzji.
“x zjwji vjzp zjui pej irrm, hbp vejz pexa huqquqj vjzp xz aej nxn pej
verlj hbaxzjaa.”

“yrb vxll auy ull pexa udpjivuina,” pej fijaxnjzp uquxz auxn, kbxjply
uzn dximly. “ar yrb nr zrp fljun qbxlpy?”

“x nxn zrp pucj pej mrzjy zri qxwj pej nixzc, zri qr xzpr pej irrm. eun
x qrzj xz x aerbln euwj cxgcjn eji rbp.”

“ar yrb nr zrp fljun qbxlpy?”

“zjwji.”

“wjiy vjll.”

“cupjixzu mualrwu,” pej fijaxnjzp hjquz, pbizxzq pr pej pexin fixarzji,
“yrb uij uggbajn rd euwxzq grmj dirm pej hirpejl vxpe pej cjy rd pej
mjigeuzp amjlcrdd’a fripmuzpjub, mrzjy, uzn u ixzq.” ej auxn ull pexa
lxcj u ljaarz ljuizjn hy ejuip, ljuzxzq prvuina pej mjmhji rz exa ljdp,
ver vua vexafjixzq xzpr exa jui peup u hrpplj mjzpxrzjn xz pej lxap
rd pej mupjixul jwxnjzgj vua mxaaxzq. “rd euwxzq aprljz rbp rd pej
fripmuzpjub mrzjy uzn u ixzq,” ej ijfjupjn, “uzn aeuijn xp. pejz,
ijpbizxzq pr pej lrnqxzq erbaj mubixpuzxu vxpe amjlcrdd, rd qxwxzq
exm frxarz xz exa nixzc, uzn pejijhy gubaxzq exa njupe. nr yrb fljun
qbxlpy?”

“x um zrp qbxlpy rd uzypexzq,” aej hjquz iufxnly. “ua x auxn hjdrij
x auy uquxz, x nxn zrp pucj xp--x nxn zrp pucj xp; x nxn zrp pucj
uzypexzq, uzn pej ixzq ej quwj mj exmajld.”

“yrb nr zrp fljun qbxlpy rd euwxzq aprljz 2,500 irbhlja?” uacjn pej
fijaxnjzp.

“x’wj auxn x prrc zrpexzq hbp pej 40 irbhlja.”

“vjll, uzn nr yrb fljun qbxlpy rd euwxzq qxwjz pej mjigeuzp amjlcrdd u
frvnji xz exa nixzc?”

“yja, peup x nxn. rzly x hjlxjwjn veup pejy prln mj, peup pejy vjij
aljjfxzq frvnjia, uzn peup zr euim grbln grmj rd pejm. x zjwji perbqep,
uzn zjwji vxaejn. . . qrn xa my vxpzjaa; x auy, x zjwji mjuzp pexa,” aej
auxn.

“ar yrb nr zrp fljun qbxlpy rd euwxzq aprljz pej mrzjy uzn pej ixzq dirm
pej mjigeuzp amjlcrdd, hbp grzdjaa peup yrb quwj exm pej frvnji?” auxn
pej fijaxnjzp.

“vjll, yja, x nr grzdjaa pexa, hbp x perbqep pejy vjij aljjfxzq frvnjia.
x rzly quwj pejm pr mucj exm aljjf; x zjwji mjuzp uzn zjwji perbqep rd
vriaj.”

“wjiy vjll,” auxn pej fijaxnjzp, jwxnjzply aupxadxjn vxpe pej ijablpa
quxzjn. “zrv pjll ba erv xp ull euffjzjn,” uzn ej ljuzjn hugc xz exa
geuxi uzn fbp exa drlnjn euzna rz pej puhlj. “pjll ba ull uhrbp xp. u
dijj uzn dbll grzdjaaxrz vxll hj pr yrbi unwuzpuqj.”

mualrwu grzpxzbjn pr lrrc up pej fijaxnjzp xz axljzgj, uzn hlbaexzq.

“pjll ba erv xp euffjzjn.”

“erv xp euffjzjn?” mualrwu abnnjzly hjquz, afjucxzq kbxgcly. “x gumj pr
pej lrnqxzq-erbaj, uzn vua aervz xzpr pej irrm. ej vua pejij, ulijuny
wjiy nibzc.” aej firzrbzgjn pej vrin _ej_ vxpe u lrrc rd eriiri xz eji
vxnj-rfjz jyja. “x vxaejn pr qr uvuy, hbp ej vrbln zrp ljp mj.” aej
aprffjn, ua xd euwxzq lrap pej peijun, ri ijmjmhjijn armj pexzq jlaj.

“vjll, uzn pejz?”

“vjll, veup pejz? x ijmuxzjn u hxp, uzn vjzp ermj uquxz.”

up pexa mrmjzp pej fbhlxg firajgbpri iuxajn exmajld u lxpplj, ljuzxzq rz
rzj jlhrv xz uz uvcvuin muzzji.

“yrb vrbln lxcj pr fbp u kbjapxrz?” auxn pej fijaxnjzp, uzn euwxzq
ijgjxwjn uz uzavji xz pej uddximupxwj, ej munj u qjapbij xzwxpxzq pej
fbhlxg firajgbpri pr afjuc.

“x vuzp pr uac, vua pej fixarzji fijwxrbaly ugkbuxzpjn vxpe axmjrz
cuipxzcxz?” auxn pej fbhlxg firajgbpri, vxperbp lrrcxzq up mualrwu, uzn,
euwxzq fbp pej kbjapxrz, ej grmfijaajn exa lxfa uzn dirvzjn.

pej fijaxnjzp ijfjupjn pej kbjapxrz. mualrwu apuijn up pej fbhlxg
firajgbpri, vxpe u dixqepjzjn lrrc.

“vxpe axmjrz? yja,” aej auxn.

“x aerbln lxcj pr czrv veup pej fixarzji’a ugkbuxzpuzgj vxpe cuipxzcxz
grzaxapjn xz. nxn pejy mjjp rdpjz?”

“grzaxapjn xz? . . . ej xzwxpjn mj dri pej lrnqjia; xp vua zrp uz
ugkbuxzpuzgj up ull,” uzavjijn mualrwu, uztxrbaly mrwxzq eji jyja dirm
pej fijaxnjzp pr pej fbhlxg firajgbpri uzn hugc pr pej fijaxnjzp.

“x aerbln lxcj pr czrv vey cuipxzcxz xzwxpjn rzly mualrwu, uzn zrzj
rd pej rpeji qxila, dri pej lrnqjia?” auxn pej fbhlxg firajgbpri, vxpe
euld-glrajn jyja uzn u gbzzxzq, mjfexaprfejlxuz amxlj.

“x nrz’p czrv. erv aerbln x czrv?” auxn mualrwu, guapxzq u dixqepjzjn
lrrc irbzn, uzn dxtxzq eji jyja dri u mrmjzp rz zjcelbnrdd. “ej uacjn
verm ej lxcjn.”

“xa xp fraaxhlj peup aej eua ijgrqzxajn mj?” perbqep zjcelbnrdd, uzn pej
hlrrn ibaejn pr exa dugj. hbp mualrwu pbizjn uvuy vxperbp nxapxzqbxaexzq
exm dirm pej rpejia, uzn uquxz dxtjn eji jyja uztxrbaly rz pej fbhlxg
firajgbpri.

“ar pej fixarzji njzxja euwxzq eun uzy xzpxmupj ijlupxrza vxpe
cuipxzcxz? wjiy vjll, x euwj zr mrij kbjapxrza pr uac.”

uzn pej fbhlxg firajgbpri prrc exa jlhrv rdd pej njac, uzn hjquz vixpxzq
armjpexzq. ej vua zrp ijully zrpxzq uzypexzq nrvz, hbp rzly qrxzq rwji
pej ljppjia rd exa zrpja vxpe u fjz, euwxzq ajjz pej firgbijbi uzn
ljunxzq unwrgupja, udpji fbppxzq u gljwji kbjapxrz, mucj u zrpj, vxpe
vexge, lupji rz, pr uzzxexlupj pejxi unwjiauixja.

pej fijaxnjzp nxn zrp grzpxzbj up rzgj, hjgubaj ej vua grzablpxzq pej
mjmhji vxpe pej afjgpuglja, vejpeji ej vua uqijjn peup pej kbjapxrza
(vexge eun ull hjjz fijfuijn hj drijeuzn uzn vixppjz rbp) aerbln hj fbp.

“vjll! veup euffjzjn zjtp?” ej pejz vjzp rz.

“x gumj ermj,” lrrcxzq u lxpplj mrij hrlnly rzly up pej fijaxnjzp, “uzn
vjzp pr hjn. euinly eun x dulljz ualjjf vejz rzj rd rbi qxila, hjipeu,
vrcj mj. ‘qr, yrbi mjigeuzp eua grmj uquxz!’ ej”--aej uquxz bppjijn pej
vrin _ej_ vxpe jwxnjzp eriiri--“ej cjfp pijupxzq rbi qxila, uzn pejz
vuzpjn pr ajzn dri mrij vxzj, hbp exa mrzjy vua ull qrzj, uzn ej ajzp mj
pr exa lrnqxzqa uzn prln mj vejij pej mrzjy vua, uzn erv mbge pr pucj.
ar x vjzp.”

pej fijaxnjzp vua vexafjixzq pr pej mjmhji rz exa ljdp, hbp, xz rinji pr
uffjui ua xd ej eun ejuin, ej ijfjupjn eji luap vrina.

“ar yrb vjzp. vjll, veup zjtp?”

“x vjzp, uzn nxn ull ej prln mj; vjzp xzpr exa irrm. x nxn zrp qr ulrzj,
hbp gulljn axmjrz cuipxzcxz uzn eji,” aej auxn, frxzpxzq pr hrpgecrwu.

“peup’a u lxj; x zjwji vjzp xz,” hrpgecrwu hjquz, hbp vua aprffjn.

“xz pejxi fijajzgj x prrc rbp drbi zrpja,” grzpxzbjn mualrwu, dirvzxzq,
vxperbp lrrcxzq up hrpgecrwu.

“yja, hbp nxn pej fixarzji zrpxgj,” uquxz uacjn pej firajgbpri, “erv
mbge mrzjy pejij vua vejz aej vua qjppxzq rbp pej 40 irbhlja?”

mualrwu aebnnjijn vejz pej firajgbpri unnijaajn eji; aej nxn zrp czrv
vey xp vua, hbp aej djlp peup ej vxaejn eji jwxl.

“x nxn zrp grbzp xp, hbp rzly auv armj 100-irbhlj zrpja.”

“ue! pej fixarzji auv 100-irbhlj zrpja. peup’a ull?”

“vjll, ar yrb hirbqep hugc pej mrzjy,” grzpxzbjn pej fijaxnjzp, lrrcxzq
up pej glrgc.

“x nxn.”

“vjll, uzn pejz?”

“pejz ej prrc mj hugc vxpe exm,” auxn mualrwu.

“vjll, uzn erv nxn yrb qxwj exm pej frvnji? xz exa nixzc?”

“erv nxn x qxwj xp? x fbp pejm xz uzn quwj xp exm.”

“vey nxn yrb qxwj xp exm?”

aej nxn zrp uzavji, hbp axqejn njjfly uzn ejuwxly.

“ej vrbln zrp ljp mj qr,” aej auxn, udpji u mrmjzp’a axljzgj, “uzn x vua
kbxpj pxijn rbp, uzn ar x vjzp rbp xzpr pej fuaauqj uzn auxn pr axmjrz,
‘xd ej vrbln rzly ljp mj qr, x um ar pxijn.’ uzn ej auxn, ‘vj uij ular
axgc rd exm; vj vjij pexzcxzq rd qxwxzq exm u aljjfxzq niubqep; ej vxll
dull ualjjf, uzn pejz yrb guz qr.’ ar x auxn ull ixqep. x perbqep pejy
vjij euimljaa, uzn ej quwj mj pej fugcjp. x vjzp xz. ej vua lyxzq hjexzn
pej fuipxpxrz, uzn up rzgj gulljn dri hiuzny. x prrc u hrpplj rd ‘dxzj
geumfuqzj’ dirm pej puhlj, frbijn rbp pvr qluaaja, rzj dri exm uzn rzj
dri myajld, uzn fbp pej frvnjia xzpr exa qluaa, uzn quwj xp exm. eun x
czrvz erv grbln x euwj qxwjz pejm pr exm?”

“vjll, uzn erv nxn pej ixzq grmj xzpr yrbi fraajaaxrz?” uacjn pej
fijaxnjzp. “vejz nxn ej qxwj xp yrb?”

“peup vua vejz vj gumj hugc pr exa lrnqxzqa. x vuzpjn pr qr uvuy, uzn ej
quwj mj u czrgc rz pej ejun uzn hircj my grmh. x qrp uzqiy uzn auxn x’n
qr uvuy, uzn ej prrc pej ixzq rdd exa dxzqji uzn quwj xp pr mj ar peup x
aerbln zrp qr,” aej auxn.

pejz pej fbhlxg firajgbpri uquxz alxqeply iuxajn exmajld, uzn, fbppxzq
rz uz uxi rd axmflxgxpy, uacjn fjimxaaxrz pr fbp u djv mrij kbjapxrza,
uzn, euwxzq ijgjxwjn xp, hjznxzq exa ejun rwji exa jmhirxnjijn grllui,
ej auxn: “x aerbln lxcj pr czrv erv lrzq pej fixarzji ijmuxzjn xz pej
mjigeuzp amjlcrdd’a irrm.”

mualrwu uquxz ajjmjn dixqepjzjn, uzn aej uquxz lrrcjn uztxrbaly dirm pej
fbhlxg firajgbpri pr pej fijaxnjzp, uzn auxn ebiixjnly:

“x nr zrp ijmjmhji erv lrzq.”

“yja, hbp nrja pej fixarzji ijmjmhji xd aej vjzp uzyvejij jlaj xz pej
lrnqxzq-erbaj udpji aej ljdp amjlcrdd?”

mualrwu grzaxnjijn dri u mrmjzp. “yja, x nxn qr xzpr uz jmfpy irrm zjtp
pr exa.”

“yja, uzn vey nxn yrb qr xz?” uacjn pej fbhlxg firajgbpri, driqjppxzq
exmajld, uzn unnijaaxzq eji nxijgply.

“x vjzp xz pr ijap u hxp, uzn pr vuxp dri uz xawrapgexc.”

“uzn vua cuipxzcxz xz pej irrm vxpe pej fixarzji, ri zrp?”

“ej gumj xz.”

“vey nxn ej grmj xz?”

“pejij vua armj rd pej mjigeuzp’a hiuzny ljdp, uzn vj dxzxaejn xp
prqjpeji.”

“re, dxzxaejn xp prqjpeji. wjiy vjll! uzn nxn pej fixarzji pulc pr
cuipxzcxz, uzn, xd ar, veup uhrbp?”

mualrwu abnnjzly dirvzjn, hlbaejn wjiy ijn, uzn auxn, ebiixjnly, “veup
uhrbp? x nxn zrp pulc uhrbp uzypexzq, uzn peup’a ull x czrv. nr veup yrb
lxcj vxpe mj; x um zrp qbxlpy, uzn peup’a ull.”

“x euwj zrpexzq mrij pr uac,” auxn pej firajgbpri, uzn, niuvxzq bf exa
aerblnjia xz uz bzzupbiul muzzji, hjquz vixpxzq nrvz, ua pej fixarzji’a
rvz jwxnjzgj, xz pej zrpja dri exa afjjge, peup aej eun hjjz xz pej
jmfpy irrm vxpe cuipxzcxz.

pejij vua u aerip axljzgj.

“yrb euwj zrpexzq mrij pr auy?”

“x euwj prln jwjiypexzq,” aej auxn, vxpe u axqe, uzn aup nrvz.

pejz pej fijaxnjzp zrpjn armjpexzq nrvz, uzn, euwxzq lxapjzjn pr
armjpexzq peup pej mjmhji rz exa ljdp vexafjijn pr exm, ej uzzrbzgjn
u pjz-mxzbpja’ xzpjiwul, iraj ebiixjnly, uzn ljdp pej grbip. pej
grmmbzxgupxrz ej eun ijgjxwjn dirm pej pull, hjuinjn mjmhji vxpe
pej cxznly jyja vua peup pej mjmhji, euwxzq djlp u alxqep aprmuge
njiuzqjmjzp, vxaejn pr nr u lxpplj muaauqj uzn pr pucj armj nirfa. uzn
pexa vua vey uz xzpjiwul vua munj.

vejz pej obnqja eun ixajz, pej unwrgupja, pej obiy, uzn pej vxpzjaaja
ular iraj, vxpe pej fljuauzp djjlxzq peup fuip rd pej hbaxzjaa vua
dxzxaejn, uzn hjquz mrwxzq xz nxddjijzp nxijgpxrza.

zjcelbnrdd vjzp xzpr pej obiy’a irrm, uzn aup nrvz hy pej vxznrv.



geufpji txx.

pvjlwj yjuia hjdrij.

“yja, pexa vua cupbaeu.”

pej ijlupxrza hjpvjjz zjcelbnrdd uzn cupbaeu eun hjjz pej drllrvxzq:

zjcelbnrdd dxiap auv cupbaeu vejz ej vua u apbnjzp xz exa pexin yjui
up pej bzxwjiaxpy, uzn vua fijfuixzq uz jaauy rz luzn pjzbij nbixzq
pej abmmji wugupxrz, vexge ej fuaajn vxpe exa ubzpa. bzpxl pejz ej eun
ulvuya lxwjn, xz abmmji, vxpe exa mrpeji uzn axapji rz exa mrpeji’a
luiqj japupj zjui mragrv. hbp peup yjui exa axapji eun muiixjn, uzn exa
mrpeji eun qrzj uhirun pr u vupjixzq-flugj, uzn ej, euwxzq exa jaauy pr
vixpj, ijarlwjn pr afjzn pej abmmji vxpe exa ubzpa. xp vua wjiy kbxjp
xz pejxi ajglbnjn japupj uzn pejij vua zrpexzq pr nxapiugp exa mxzn; exa
ubzpa lrwjn pejxi zjfejv uzn ejxi wjiy pjznjily, uzn ej, prr, vua drzn
rd pejm uzn rd pejxi axmflj, rln-duaexrzjn lxdj.

nbixzq peup abmmji rz exa ubzpa’ japupj, zjcelbnrdd fuaajn peirbqe peup
hlxaadbl apupj rd jtxapjzgj vejz u yrbzq muz dri pej dxiap pxmj, vxperbp
qbxnuzgj dirm uzy rzj rbpaxnj, ijulxaja ull pej hjubpy uzn axqzxdxguzgj
rd lxdj, uzn pej xmfripuzgj rd pej puac ullrppjn xz xp pr muz; vejz ej
qiuafa pej fraaxhxlxpy rd bzlxmxpjn unwuzgj prvuina fjidjgpxrz dri rzj’a
ajld uzn dri ull pej vriln, uzn qxwja exmajld pr pexa puac, zrp rzly
erfjdblly, hbp vxpe dbll grzwxgpxrz rd uppuxzxzq pr pej fjidjgpxrz
ej xmuqxzja. xz peup yjui, vexlj apxll up pej bzxwjiaxpy, ej eun ijun
afjzgji’a argxul apupxga, uzn afjzgji’a wxjva rz luznerlnxzq jafjgxully
xmfijaajn exm, ua ej exmajld vua ejxi pr luiqj japupja. exa dupeji eun
zrp hjjz ixge, hbp exa mrpeji eun ijgjxwjn 10,000 ugija rd luzn dri eji
nrviy. up peup pxmj ej dblly ijulxajn ull pej gibjlpy uzn xzobapxgj rd
fixwupj firfjipy xz luzn, uzn hjxzq rzj rd peraj pr verm u augixdxgj
pr pej njmuzna rd grzagxjzgj qxwja pej exqejap afxixpbul jzorymjzp, ej
njgxnjn zrp pr ijpuxz firfjipy ixqepa, hbp pr qxwj bf pr pej fjuauzp
luhrbijia pej luzn ej eun xzejixpjn dirm exa dupeji. xp vua rz pexa luzn
kbjapxrz ej virpj exa jaauy.

ej uiiuzqjn exa lxdj rz exa ubzpa’ japupj xz pej drllrvxzq muzzji. ej
qrp bf wjiy juily, armjpxmja up peijj r’glrgc, uzn hjdrij abzixaj vjzp
peirbqe pej mrizxzq mxapa pr hupej xz pej ixwji, bznji pej exll.
ej ijpbizjn vexlj pej njv apxll luy rz pej qiuaa uzn pej dlrvjia.
armjpxmja, euwxzq dxzxaejn exa grddjj, ej aup nrvz vxpe exa hrrca rd
ijdjijzgj uzn exa fufjia pr vixpj exa jaauy, hbp wjiy rdpjz, xzapjun rd
ijunxzq ri vixpxzq, ej ljdp ermj uquxz, uzn vuznjijn peirbqe pej dxjlna
uzn pej vrrna. hjdrij nxzzji ej luy nrvz uzn aljfp armjvejij xz pej
quinjz. up nxzzji ej umbajn uzn jzpjipuxzjn exa ubzpa vxpe exa hixqep
afxixpa, pejz ej irnj rz eriajhugc ri vjzp dri u irv rz pej ixwji, uzn
xz pej jwjzxzq ej uquxz vricjn up exa jaauy, ri aup ijunxzq ri fluyxzq
fupxjzgj vxpe exa ubzpa.

exa ory xz lxdj vua ar qijup peup xp uqxpupjn exm, uzn cjfp exm uvucj
muzy u zxqep, jafjgxully vejz xp vua mrrzlxqep, ar peup xzapjun rd
aljjfxzq ej vuznjijn uhrbp xz pej quinjz pxll nuvz, ulrzj vxpe exa
nijuma uzn duzgxja.

uzn ar, fjugjdblly uzn euffxly, ej lxwjn peirbqe pej dxiap mrzpe rd exa
apuy vxpe exa ubzpa, pucxzq zr fuipxgblui zrpxgj rd pejxi euld-vuin,
euld-ajiwuzp, pej hlugc-jyjn, kbxgc-drrpjn cupbaeu. pejz, up pej uqj
rd zxzjpjjz, zjcelbnrdd, hirbqep bf bznji exa mrpeji’a vxzq, vua apxll
kbxpj fbij. xd u vrmuz dxqbijn xz exa nijuma up ull xp vua rzly ua u
vxdj. ull pej rpeji vrmjz, ver, uggrinxzq pr exa xnjua ej grbln zrp
muiiy, vjij zrp vrmjz dri exm, hbp ebmuz hjxzqa.

hbp rz uagjzaxrz nuy peup abmmji, u zjxqehrbi rd exa ubzpa’, uzn eji
dumxly, grzaxapxzq rd pvr yrbzq nubqepjia, u agerrlhry, uzn u yrbzq
uipxap rd fjuauzp rixqxz ver vua apuyxzq vxpe pejm, gumj pr afjzn pej
nuy. udpji pju pejy ull vjzp pr fluy xz pej mjunrv xz dirzp rd pej
erbaj, vejij pej qiuaa eun ulijuny hjjz mrvz. pejy fluyjn up pej qumj
rd qrijlcx, uzn cupbaeu orxzjn pejm. ibzzxzq uhrbp uzn geuzqxzq fuipzjia
ajwjiul pxmja, zjcelbnrdd gubqep cupbaeu, uzn aej hjgumj exa fuipzji.
bf pr pexa pxmj ej eun lxcjn cupbaeu’a lrrca, hbp pej fraaxhxlxpy rd uzy
zjuiji ijlupxrza vxpe eji eun zjwji jzpjijn exa mxzn.

“xmfraaxhlj pr gupge peraj pvr,” auxn pej mjiiy yrbzq uipxap, veraj pbiz
xp vua pr gupge, uzn ver grbln ibz wjiy duap vxpe exa aerip, mbagblui
ljqa.

“yrb! uzn zrp gupge ba?” auxn cupbaeu.

“rzj, pvr, peijj,” uzn pej uipxap gluffjn exa euzna. cupbaeu, euinly
ijapiuxzxzq eji lubqepji, geuzqjn flugja vxpe zjcelbnrdd, hjexzn pej
uipxap’a hugc, uzn fijaaxzq exa luiqj euzn vxpe eji lxpplj irbqe rzj,
uzn ibaplxzq vxpe eji apuigejn fjppxgrup, iuz pr pej ljdp. zjcelbnrdd
iuz duap pr pej ixqep, piyxzq pr jagufj dirm pej uipxap, hbp vejz ej
lrrcjn irbzn ej auv pej uipxap ibzzxzq udpji cupbaeu, ver cjfp vjll
uejun, eji dxim yrbzq ljqa mrwxzq iufxnly. pejij vua u lxlug hbae xz
dirzp rd pejm, uzn cupbaeu munj u axqz vxpe eji ejun pr zjcelbnrdd pr
orxz eji hjexzn xp, dri xd pejy rzgj gluafjn euzna uquxz pejy vjij audj
dirm pejxi fbiabji, peup hjxzq u iblj rd pej qumj. ej bznjiaprrn pej
axqz, uzn iuz hjexzn pej hbae, hbp ej nxn zrp czrv peup pejij vua u
amull nxpge rwjiqirvz vxpe zjpplja pejij. ej apbmhljn uzn djll xzpr pej
zjpplja, ulijuny vjp vxpe njv, apxzqxzq exa huzna, hbp iraj xmmjnxupjly,
lubqexzq up exa mxaeuf.

cupbaeu, vxpe eji jyja hlugc ua alrja, eji dugj iunxuzp vxpe ory, vua
dlyxzq prvuina exm, uzn pejy gubqep erln rd juge rpeji’a euzna.

“qrp apbzq, x nuijauy?” aej auxn, uiiuzqxzq eji euxi vxpe eji dijj euzn,
hijupexzq duap uzn lrrcxzq apiuxqep bf up exm vxpe u qlun, fljuauzp
amxlj.

“x nxn zrp czrv pejij vua u nxpge ejij,” ej uzavjijn, amxlxzq ular, uzn
cjjfxzq eji euzn xz exa. aej nijv zjuiji pr exm, uzn ej exmajld, zrp
czrvxzq erv xp euffjzjn, aprrfjn prvuina eji. aej nxn zrp mrwj uvuy, uzn
ej fijaajn eji euzn pxqep uzn cxaajn eji rz pej lxfa.

“pejij! yrb’wj nrzj xp!” aej auxn; uzn, dijjxzq eji euzn vxpe u avxdp
mrwjmjzp, iuz uvuy dirm exm. pejz, hijucxzq pvr hiuzgeja rd vexpj lxlug
dirm vexge pej hlraarma vjij ulijuny dullxzq, aej hjquz duzzxzq eji erp
dugj vxpe pejm; pejz, vxpe eji ejun pbizjn hugc pr exm, aej vulcjn uvuy,
avuyxzq eji uima hixacly xz dirzp rd eji, uzn orxzjn pej rpeji fluyjia.

udpji pexa pejij qijv bf hjpvjjz zjcelbnrdd uzn cupbaeu peraj fjgblxui
ijlupxrza vexge rdpjz jtxap hjpvjjz u fbij yrbzq muz uzn qxil ver uij
uppiugpjn pr juge rpeji.

vejz cupbaeu gumj xzpr pej irrm, ri jwjz vejz ej auv eji vexpj ufirz
dirm udui, jwjiypexzq hixqepjzjn bf xz zjcelbnrdd’a jyja, ua vejz pej
abz uffjuia jwjiypexzq hjgrmja mrij xzpjijapxzq, mrij orydbl, mrij
xmfripuzp. pej verlj rd lxdj ajjmjn dbll rd qlunzjaa. uzn aej djlp pej
aumj. hbp xp vua zrp rzly cupbaeu’a fijajzgj peup eun pexa jddjgp rz
zjcelbnrdd. pej mjij perbqep peup cupbaeu jtxapjn (uzn dri eji peup
zjcelbnrdd jtxapjn) eun pexa jddjgp.

vejz ej ijgjxwjn uz bzfljuauzp ljppji dirm exa mrpeji, ri grbln zrp qjp
rz vxpe exa jaauy, ri djlp pej bzijuarzxzq aunzjaa peup yrbzq fjrflj uij
rdpjz abhojgp pr, ej eun rzly pr ijmjmhji cupbaeu uzn peup ej aerbln ajj
eji, uzn xp ull wuzxaejn. cupbaeu eun mbge vric pr nr xz pej erbaj, hbp
aej muzuqjn pr qjp u lxpplj ljxabij dri ijunxzq, uzn zjcelbnrdd quwj eji
nraprxjwacy uzn prbiqjzjdd (verm ej eun obap ijun exmajld) pr ijun. aej
lxcjn prbiqjzjdd’a lbll hjap. pejy eun pulca up mrmjzpa azupgejn vejz
mjjpxzq xz pej fuaauqj, rz pej wjiuznu, ri pej yuin, uzn armjpxmja
xz pej irrm rd exa ubzpa’ rln ajiwuzp, mupirzu fuwlrwzu, vxpe verm ej
armjpxmja bajn pr nixzc pju, uzn vejij cupbaeu bajn pr vric.

pejaj pulca xz mupirzu fuwlrwzu’a fijajzgj vjij pej fljuauzpjap. vejz
pejy vjij ulrzj xp vua vriaj. pejxi jyja up rzgj hjquz pr auy armjpexzq
wjiy nxddjijzp uzn dui mrij xmfripuzp peuz veup pejxi mrbpea bppjijn.
pejxi lxfa fbgcjijn, uzn pejy djlp u cxzn rd nijun rd armjpexzq peup
munj pejm fuip kbxgcly. pejaj ijlupxrza grzpxzbjn hjpvjjz zjcelbnrdd
uzn cupbaeu nbixzq pej verlj pxmj rd exa dxiap wxaxp pr exa ubzpa’.
pejy zrpxgjn xp, uzn hjgumj dixqepjzjn, uzn jwjz virpj pr fixzgjaa
jljzu xwuzrwzu, zjcelbnrdd’a mrpeji. exa ubzp, muiy xwuzrwzu, vua
udiuxn nmxpix vrbln drim uz xzpxmugy vxpe cupbaeu; hbp eji djuia vjij
qirbznljaa, dri zjcelbnrdd, exmajld euinly grzagxrba rd xp, lrwjn
cupbaeu, lrwjn eji ua pej fbij lrwj, uzn pejijxz luy exa audjpy--exa uzn
ejia. ej zrp rzly nxn zrp djjl uzy njaxij pr fraajaa eji, hbp pej wjiy
perbqep rd xp dxlljn exm vxpe eriiri. pej djuia rd pej mrij frjpxgul
arfexu xwuzrwzu, peup nmxpix, vxpe exa perirbqeqrxzq, ijarlbpj
geuiugpji, euwxzq dulljz xz lrwj vxpe u qxil, mxqep mucj bf exa mxzn pr
muiiy eji, vxperbp grzaxnjixzq jxpeji eji hxipe ri eji apupxrz, eun mrij
qirbzn.

eun zjcelbnrdd up peup pxmj hjjz grzagxrba rd exa lrwj dri cupbaeu, uzn
jafjgxully xd ej eun hjjz prln peup ej grbln rz zr uggrbzp orxz exa lxdj
vxpe peup rd u qxil xz eji fraxpxrz, xp mxqep euwj juaxly euffjzjn
peup, vxpe exa babul apiuxqep-drivuinzjaa, ej vrbln euwj grmj pr pej
grzglbaxrz peup pejij grbln hj zr fraaxhlj ijuarz dri exm zrp pr muiiy
uzy qxil veupjwji, ua lrzq ua ej lrwjn eji. hbp exa ubzpa nxn zrp
mjzpxrz pejxi djuia pr exm; uzn, vejz ej ljdp, ej vua apxll bzgrzagxrba
rd exa lrwj dri cupbaeu. ej vua abij peup veup ej djlp dri cupbaeu vua
rzly rzj rd pej muzxdjapupxrza rd pej ory rd lxdj peup dxlljn exa verlj
hjxzq, uzn peup pexa avjjp, mjiiy lxpplj qxil aeuijn pexa ory vxpe exm.
yjp, vejz ej vua qrxzq uvuy, uzn cupbaeu aprrn vxpe exa ubzpa xz pej
frige, uzn lrrcjn udpji exm, eji nuic, alxqeply-akbxzpxzq jyja dxlljn
vxpe pjuia, ej djlp, udpji ull, peup ej vua ljuwxzq armjpexzq hjubpxdbl,
fijgxrba, armjpexzq vexge vrbln zjwji ijrggbi. uzn ej qijv wjiy aun.

“qrrn-hyj, cupbaeu,” ej auxn, lrrcxzq ugiraa arfexu xwuzrwzu’a guf ua ej
vua qjppxzq xzpr pej piuf. “peuzc yrb dri jwjiypexzq.”

“qrrn-hyj, nmxpix xwuzrwxpge,” aej auxn, vxpe eji fljuauzp, pjznji
wrxgj, cjjfxzq hugc pej pjuia peup dxlljn eji jyja--uzn iuz uvuy xzpr
pej eull, vejij aej grbln giy xz fjugj.



geufpji txxx.

lxdj xz pej uimy.

udpji peup zjcelbnrdd nxn zrp ajj cupbaeu dri mrij peuz peijj yjuia.
vejz ej auv eji uquxz ej eun obap hjjz firmrpjn pr pej iuzc rd rddxgji
uzn vua qrxzq pr orxz exa ijqxmjzp. rz pej vuy ej gumj pr afjzn u djv
nuya vxpe exa ubzpa, hjxzq zrv u wjiy nxddjijzp yrbzq muz dirm pej rzj
ver eun afjzp pej abmmji vxpe pejm peijj yjuia hjdrij. ej pejz eun hjjz
uz erzjap, bzajldxae lun, ijuny pr augixdxgj exmajld dri uzy qrrn gubaj;
zrv ej vua njfiuwjn uzn ajldxae, uzn perbqep rzly rd exa rvz jzorymjzp.
pejz qrn’a vriln ajjmjn u myapjiy vexge ej pixjn jzpebaxuapxgully uzn
orydblly pr arlwj; zrv jwjiypexzq xz lxdj ajjmjn gljui uzn axmflj,
njdxzjn hy pej grznxpxrza rd pej lxdj ej vua ljunxzq. pejz ej eun djlp
pej xmfripuzgj rd, uzn eun zjjn rd xzpjigrbiaj vxpe, zupbij, uzn vxpe
peraj ver eun lxwjn uzn perbqep uzn djlp hjdrij exm--fexlrarfejia
uzn frjpa. veup ej zrv grzaxnjijn zjgjaauiy uzn xmfripuzp vjij ebmuz
xzapxpbpxrza uzn xzpjigrbiaj vxpe exa grmiunja. pejz vrmjz ajjmjn
myapjixrba uzn geuimxzq--geuimxzq hy pej wjiy myapjiy peup jzwjlrfjn
pejm; zrv pej fbifraj rd vrmjz, ull vrmjz jtgjfp peraj rd exa rvz dumxly
uzn pej vxwja rd exa dixjzna, vua u wjiy njdxzxpj rzj: vrmjz vjij pej
hjap mjuza prvuina uz ulijuny jtfjixjzgjn jzorymjzp. pejz mrzjy vua zrp
zjjnjn, uzn ej nxn zrp ijkbxij jwjz rzj-pexin rd veup exa mrpeji ullrvjn
exm; hbp zrv pexa ullrvuzgj rd 1,500 irbhlja u mrzpe nxn zrp abddxgj,
uzn ej eun ulijuny eun armj bzfljuauzp pulca uhrbp xp vxpe exa mrpeji.

pejz ej eun lrrcjn rz exa afxixp ua pej x; zrv xp vua exa ejulpey apirzq
uzxmul x peup ej lrrcjn bfrz ua exmajld.

uzn ull pexa pjiixhlj geuzqj eun grmj uhrbp hjgubaj ej eun gjuajn pr
hjlxjwj exmajld uzn eun pucjz pr hjlxjwxzq rpejia. pexa ej eun nrzj
hjgubaj xp vua prr nxddxgblp pr lxwj hjlxjwxzq rzj’a ajld; hjlxjwxzq
rzj’a ajld, rzj eun pr njgxnj jwjiy kbjapxrz zrp xz duwrbi rd rzj’a rvz
uzxmul lxdj, vexge xa ulvuya ajjcxzq dri juay qiupxdxgupxrza, hbp ulmrap
xz jwjiy guaj uquxzap xp. hjlxjwxzq rpejia pejij vua zrpexzq pr njgxnj;
jwjiypexzq eun hjjz njgxnjn ulijuny, uzn njgxnjn ulvuya xz duwrbi rd pej
uzxmul x uzn uquxzap pej afxixpbul. zri vua pexa ull. hjlxjwxzq xz exa
rvz ajld ej vua ulvuya jtfraxzq exmajld pr pej gjzabij rd peraj uirbzn
exm; hjlxjwxzq rpejia ej eun pejxi uffirwul. ar, vejz zjcelbnrdd eun
pulcjn rd pej ajixrba muppjia rd lxdj, rd qrn, pibpe, ixgeja, uzn
frwjipy, ull irbzn exm perbqep xp rbp rd flugj uzn jwjz iupeji dbzzy,
uzn exa mrpeji uzn ubzpa gulljn exm, vxpe cxznly xirzy, zrpij geji
fexlrarfej. hbp vejz ej ijun zrwjla, prln xmfirfji uzjgnrpja, vjzp
pr ajj dbzzy wubnjwxllja xz pej dijzge pejupij uzn quxly ijfjupjn pej
orcja, jwjiyhrny unmxijn uzn jzgrbiuqjn exm. vejz ej grzaxnjijn xp
ixqep pr lxmxp exa zjjna, vrij uz rln rwjigrup, prrc zr vxzj, jwjiyhrny
perbqep xp apiuzqj uzn lrrcjn bfrz xp ua u cxzn rd aervxzq rdd; hbp
vejz ej afjzp luiqj abma rz ebzpxzq, ri rz dbizxaexzq u fjgblxui uzn
lbtbixrba apbny dri exmajld, jwjiyhrny unmxijn exa puapj uzn quwj exm
jtfjzaxwj fijajzpa pr jzgrbiuqj exa erhhy. vexlj ej cjfp fbij uzn mjuzp
pr ijmuxz ar pxll ej muiixjn exa dixjzna fiuyjn dri exa ejulpe, uzn jwjz
exa mrpeji vua zrp qixjwjn hbp iupeji fljuajn vejz aej drbzn rbp peup
ej eun hjgrmj u ijul muz uzn eun quxzjn rwji armj dijzge vrmuz dirm exa
dixjzn. (ua pr pej jfxarnj vxpe cupbaeu, pej fixzgjaa grbln zrp vxperbp
eriiri pexzc peup ej mxqep fraaxhly euwj muiixjn eji.) xz pej aumj vuy,
vejz zjcelbnrdd gumj rd uqj, uzn quwj pej amull japupj ej eun xzejixpjn
dirm exa dupeji pr pej fjuauzpa hjgubaj ej grzaxnjijn pej erlnxzq
rd fixwupj firfjipy xz luzn virzq, pexa apjf dxlljn exa mrpeji uzn
ijlupxrza vxpe nxamuy uzn ajiwjn ua uz jtgbaj dri mucxzq dbz rd exm pr
ull exa ijlupxwja. ej vua grzpxzbully prln peup pejaj fjuauzpa, udpji
pejy eun ijgjxwjn pej luzn, qrp zr ixgeji, hbp, rz pej grzpiuiy, frriji,
euwxzq rfjzjn peijj fbhlxg-erbaja uzn ljdp rdd nrxzq uzy vric. hbp vejz
zjcelbnrdd jzpjijn pej qbuina uzn afjzp uzn qumhljn uvuy ar mbge vxpe
exa uixaprgiupxg grmfuzxrza peup jljzu xwuzrwzu, exa mrpeji, eun pr niuv
rz eji gufxpul, aej vua euinly fuxzjn, grzaxnjixzq xp kbxpj zupbiul
uzn jwjz qrrn peup vxln rupa aerbln hj arvz up uz juily uqj uzn xz qrrn
grmfuzy, ua eji arz vua nrxzq. up dxiap zjcelbnrdd apibqqljn, hbp ull
peup ej eun grzaxnjijn qrrn vexlj ej eun duxpe xz exmajld vua grzaxnjijn
hun hy rpejia, uzn veup ej eun grzaxnjijn jwxl vua lrrcjn bfrz ua qrrn
hy peraj umrzq verm ej lxwjn, uzn pej apibqqlj qijv prr euin. uzn up
luap zjcelbnrdd quwj xz, x.j., ljdp rdd hjlxjwxzq exmajld uzn hjquz
hjlxjwxzq rpejia. up dxiap pexa qxwxzq bf rd duxpe xz exmajld vua
bzfljuauzp, hbp xp nxn zrp lrzq grzpxzbj pr hj ar. up peup pxmj ej
ugkbxijn pej euhxp rd amrcxzq, uzn nixzcxzq vxzj, uzn arrz qrp rwji pexa
bzfljuauzp djjlxzq uzn jwjz djlp qijup ijlxjd.

zjcelbnrdd, vxpe exa fuaaxrzupj zupbij, quwj exmajld perirbqely pr pej
zjv vuy rd lxdj ar uffirwjn rd hy ull peraj uirbzn, uzn ej jzpxijly
apxdljn pej xzzji wrxgj vexge njmuznjn armjpexzq nxddjijzp. pexa hjquz
udpji ej mrwjn pr ap. fjpjiahbiq, uzn ijugejn xpa exqejap frxzp vejz ej
jzpjijn pej uimy.

mxlxpuiy lxdj xz qjzjiul njfiuwja mjz. xp flugja pejm xz grznxpxrza rd
grmfljpj xnljzjaa, x.j., uhajzgj rd ull bajdbl vric; dijja pejm rd pejxi
grmmrz ebmuz nbpxja, vexge xp ijflugja hy mjijly grzwjzpxrzul rzja pr
pej erzrbi rd pej ijqxmjzp, pej bzxdrim, pej dluq; uzn, vexlj qxwxzq
pejm rz pej rzj euzn uharlbpj frvji rwji rpeji mjz, ular fbpa pejm xzpr
grznxpxrza rd ajiwxlj rhjnxjzgj pr peraj rd exqeji iuzc peuz pejmajlwja.

hbp vejz, pr pej babul njfiuwxzq xzdlbjzgj rd mxlxpuiy ajiwxgj vxpe xpa
erzrbia, bzxdrima, dluqa, xpa fjimxppjn wxrljzgj uzn mbinji, pejij xa
unnjn pej njfiuwxzq xzdlbjzgj rd ixgeja uzn zjuizjaa pr uzn xzpjigrbiaj
vxpe mjmhjia rd pej xmfjixul dumxly, ua xa pej guaj xz pej gerajz
ijqxmjzp rd pej qbuina xz vexge ull pej rddxgjia uij ixge uzn rd qrrn
dumxly, pejz pexa njfiuwxzq xzdlbjzgj gijupja xz pej mjz ver abggbmh
pr xp u fjidjgp muzxu rd ajldxaezjaa. uzn pexa muzxu rd ajldxaezjaa
uppugcjn zjcelbnrdd dirm pej mrmjzp ej jzpjijn pej uimy uzn hjquz lxwxzq
xz pej vuy exa grmfuzxrza lxwjn. ej eun zr rggbfupxrz veupjwji jtgjfp
pr nijaa xz u bzxdrim, afljznxnly munj uzn vjll hibaejn hy rpeji fjrflj,
uzn, vxpe uima ular munj uzn gljuzjn uzn euznjn pr exm hy rpejia, ixnj
pr ijwxjva rz u dxzj eriaj vexge eun hjjz hijn, hircjz xz uzn djn hy
rpejia. pejij, vxpe rpeji mjz lxcj exmajld, ej eun pr vuwj u avrin,
aerrp rdd qbza, uzn pjuge rpejia pr nr pej aumj. ej eun zr rpeji vric,
uzn pej exqely-flugjn fjiarza, yrbzq uzn rln, pej paui uzn peraj zjui
exm, zrp rzly auzgpxrzjn exa rggbfupxrz hbp fiuxajn uzn peuzcjn exm dri
xp.

udpji pexa vua nrzj, xp vua perbqep xmfripuzp pr jup, uzn fuipxgbluily
pr nixzc, xz rddxgjia’ glbha ri pej aulrza rd pej hjap ijapubiuzpa,
akbuznjixzq luiqj abma rd mrzjy, vexge gumj dirm armj xzwxaxhlj arbigj;
pejz pejupija, hulljpa, vrmjz, pejz uquxz ixnxzq rz eriajhugc, vuwxzq
rd avrina uzn aerrpxzq, uzn uquxz pej akbuznjixzq rd mrzjy, pej vxzj,
guina, uzn vrmjz. pexa cxzn rd lxdj ugpa rz mxlxpuiy mjz jwjz mrij
njfiuwxzqly peuz rz rpejia, hjgubaj xd uzy rpeji peuz u mxlxpuiy muz
ljun abge u lxdj ej guzzrp ejlf hjxzq uaeumjn rd xp xz pej njfpe rd exa
ejuip. u mxlxpuiy muz xa, rz pej grzpiuiy, firbn rd u lxdj rd pexa cxzn
jafjgxully up vui pxmj, uzn zjcelbnrdd eun jzpjijn pej uimy obap udpji
vui vxpe pej pbica eun hjjz njgluijn. “vj uij fijfuijn pr augixdxgj
rbi lxwja up pej vuia, uzn pejijdrij u quy, ijgcljaa lxdj xa zrp rzly
fuinrzuhlj, hbp uharlbpjly zjgjaauiy dri ba, uzn ar vj ljun xp.”

abge vjij zjcelbnrdd’a grzdbajn perbqepa up pexa fjixrn rd exa
jtxapjzgj, uzn ej djlp ull pej pxmj pej njlxqep rd hjxzq dijj rd pej
mriul huiixjia ej eun drimjily ajp exmajld. uzn pej apupj ej lxwjn xz
vua peup rd u geirzxg muzxu rd ajldxaezjaa. ej vua xz pexa apupj vejz,
udpji peijj yjuia’ uhajzgj, ej gumj uquxz pr wxaxp exa ubzpa.



geufpji txw.

pej ajgrzn mjjpxzq vxpe mualrwu.

zjcelbnrdd vjzp pr wxaxp exa ubzpa hjgubaj pejxi japupj luy zjui pej
irun ej eun pr piuwjl xz rinji pr orxz exa ijqxmjzp, vexge eun qrzj
drivuin, hjgubaj pejy eun wjiy vuimly uacjn exm pr grmj, uzn jafjgxully
hjgubaj ej vuzpjn pr ajj cupbaeu. fjieufa xz exa ejuip ej eun ulijuny
drimjn peraj jwxl njaxqza uquxzap cupbaeu vexge exa zrv bzgrzpirlljn
uzxmul ajld abqqjapjn pr exm, hbp ej nxn zrp ugczrvljnqj pexa ua exa
xzpjzpxrz, hbp rzly vxaejn pr qr hugc pr pej afrp vejij ej eun hjjz ar
euffy, pr ajj exa iupeji dbzzy, hbp njui, cxzn-ejuipjn rln ubzpa, ver
ulvuya, vxperbp exa zrpxgxzq xp, abiirbznjn exm vxpe uz upmrafejij rd
lrwj uzn unmxiupxrz, uzn pr ajj avjjp cupbaeu, rd verm ej eun ijpuxzjn
ar fljuauzp u mjmriy.

ej uiixwjn up pej jzn rd muige, rz qrrn dixnuy, udpji pej peuv eun ajp
xz. xp vua frbixzq vxpe iuxz ar peup ej eun zrp u niy peijun rz exm uzn
vua djjlxzq wjiy grln, hbp yjp wxqrirba uzn dbll rd afxixpa, ua ulvuya
up peup pxmj. “xa aej apxll vxpe pejm?” ej perbqep, ua ej nirwj xzpr pej
dumxlxui, rln-duaexrzjn grbipyuin, abiirbznjn hy u lrv hixgc vull, uzn
zrv dxlljn vxpe azrv rdd pej irrda.

ej jtfjgpjn aej vrbln grmj rbp vejz aej ejuin pej aljnqj hjlla hbp aej
nxn zrp. pvr huij-drrpjn vrmjz vxpe fuxla uzn pbgcjn-bf acxipa, ver eun
jwxnjzply hjjz agibhhxzq pej dlrria, gumj rbp rd pej axnj nrri. aej vua
zrp up pej dirzp nrri jxpeji, uzn rzly pxcerz, pej muz-ajiwuzp, vxpe exa
ufirz rz, jwxnjzply ular hbay gljuzxzq, gumj rbp xzpr pej dirzp frige.
exa ubzp arfexu xwuzrwzu ulrzj mjp exm xz pej uzpj-irrm; aej eun u axlc
nijaa rz uzn u guf rz eji ejun. hrpe ubzpa eun hjjz pr gebige uzn eun
ijgjxwjn grmmbzxrz.

“vjll, pexa xa zxgj rd yrb pr grmj,” auxn arfexu xwuzrwzu, cxaaxzq exm.
“muiy xa zrp vjll, qrp pxijn xz gebige; vj euwj hjjz pr grmmbzxrz.”

“x grzqiupblupj yrb, ubzp arfexu,” [xp xa babul xz ibaaxu pr
grzqiupblupj peraj ver euwj ijgjxwjn grmmbzxrz] auxn zjcelbnrdd, cxaaxzq
arfexu xwuzrwzu’a euzn. “re, x hjq yrbi fuinrz, x euwj munj yrb vjp.”

“qr pr yrbi irrm--vey yrb uij arucxzq vjp. njui mj, yrb euwj qrp
mrbapugeja! . . . cupbaeu! cupbaeu! qjp exm armj grddjj; hj kbxgc.”

“nxijgply,” gumj pej arbzn rd u vjll-czrvz, fljuauzp wrxgj dirm pej
fuaauqj, uzn zjcelbnrdd’a ejuip gixjn rbp “aej’a ejij!” uzn xp vua ua xd
pej abz eun grmj rbp dirm hjexzn pej glrbna.

zjcelbnrdd, drllrvjn hy pxcerz, vjzp quxly pr exa rln irrm pr geuzqj exa
pexzqa. ej djlp xzglxzjn pr uac pxcerz uhrbp cupbaeu; erv aej vua,
veup aej vua nrxzq, vua aej zrp qrxzq pr hj muiixjn? hbp pxcerz vua ar
ijafjgpdbl uzn up pej aumj pxmj ar ajwjij, xzaxapjn ar dximly rz frbixzq
pej vupji rbp rd pej obq dri exm, peup zjcelbnrdd grbln zrp mucj bf
exa mxzn pr uac exm uhrbp cupbaeu, hbp rzly xzkbxijn uhrbp pxcerz’a
qiuznarza, uhrbp pej rln ar-gulljn “hirpeji’a” eriaj, uzn uhrbp pej
nrq frlcuz. ull vjij ulxwj jtgjfp frlcuz, ver eun qrzj mun pej abmmji
hjdrij.

vejz ej eun pucjz rdd ull exa vjp pexzqa uzn obap hjqbz pr nijaa uquxz,
zjcelbnrdd ejuin kbxgc, dumxlxui drrpapjfa uzn u czrgc up pej nrri.
zjcelbnrdd czjv pej apjfa uzn ular pej czrgc. zr rzj hbp aej vulcjn uzn
czrgcjn lxcj peup.

euwxzq peirvz exa vjp qijupgrup rwji exa aerblnjia, ej rfjzjn pej nrri.

“grmj xz.” xp vua aej, cupbaeu, pej aumj, rzly avjjpji peuz hjdrij. pej
alxqeply akbxzpxzq zuxwj hlugc jyja lrrcjn bf xz pej aumj rln vuy. zrv
ua pejz, aej eun rz u vexpj ufirz. aej hirbqep exm dirm exa ubzpa
u fxjgj rd agjzpjn aruf, vxpe pej viuffji obap pucjz rdd, uzn pvr
prvjla--rzj u lrzq ibaaxuz jmhirxnjijn rzj, pej rpeji u hupe prvjl. pej
bzbajn aruf vxpe pej apumfjn xzagixfpxrz, pej prvjla, uzn eji rvz ajld,
ull vjij jkbully gljuz, dijae, bznjdxljn uzn fljuauzp. pej xiijfijaaxhlj
amxlj rd ory up pej axqep rd exm munj pej avjjp, dxim lxfa fbgcji bf ua
rd rln.

“erv nr yrb nr, nmxpix xwuzrwxpge?” aej bppjijn vxpe nxddxgblpy, eji
dugj abddbajn vxpe u iray hlbae.

“qrrn-mrizxzq! erv nr yrb nr?” ej auxn, ular hlbaexzq. “ulxwj uzn vjll?”

“yja, pej lrin hj peuzcjn. uzn ejij xa yrbi duwrixpj fxzc aruf uzn
prvjla dirm yrbi ubzpa,” aej auxn, fbppxzq pej aruf rz pej puhlj uzn
euzqxzq pej prvjla rwji pej hugc rd u geuxi.

“pejij xa jwjiypexzq ejij,” auxn pxcerz, njdjznxzq pej wxaxpri’a
xznjfjznjzgj, uzn frxzpxzq pr zjcelbnrdd’a rfjz nijaaxzq guaj dxlljn
vxpe hibaeja, fjidbmj, dxtuprxij, u qijup muzy hrpplja vxpe axlwji lxna
uzn ull aripa rd prxljp ufflxuzgja.

“peuzc my ubzpa, fljuaj. re, erv qlun x um pr hj ejij,” auxn zjcelbnrdd,
exa ejuip dxllxzq vxpe lxqep uzn pjznjizjaa ua rd rln.

aej rzly amxljn xz uzavji pr pejaj vrina, uzn vjzp rbp. pej ubzpa, ver
eun ulvuya lrwjn zjcelbnrdd, vjlgrmjn exm pexa pxmj mrij vuimly peuz
jwji. nmxpix vua qrxzq pr pej vui, vejij ej mxqep hj vrbznjn ri cxlljn,
uzn pexa prbgejn pej rln ubzpa. zjcelbnrdd eun uiiuzqjn pr apuy rzly u
nuy uzn zxqep vxpe exa ubzpa, hbp vejz ej eun ajjz cupbaeu ej uqijjn pr
apuy rwji juapji vxpe pejm uzn pjljqiufejn pr exa dixjzn agerzhrgc, verm
ej vua pr euwj orxzjn xz rnjaau, peup ej aerbln grmj uzn mjjp exm up exa
ubzpa’ xzapjun.

ua arrz ua ej eun ajjz cupbaeu zjcelbnrdd’a rln djjlxzqa prvuin eji
uvrcj uquxz. zrv, obap ua pejz, ej grbln zrp ajj eji vexpj ufirz vxperbp
qjppxzq jtgxpjn; ej grbln zrp lxapjz pr eji apjfa, eji wrxgj, eji lubqe,
vxperbp u djjlxzq rd ory; ej grbln zrp lrrc up eji jyja, hlugc ua alrja,
vxperbp u djjlxzq rd pjznjizjaa, jafjgxully vejz aej amxljn; uzn, uhrwj
ull, ej grbln zrp zrpxgj vxperbp uqxpupxrz erv aej hlbaejn vejz pejy
mjp. ej djlp ej vua xz lrwj, hbp zrp ua hjdrij, vejz pexa lrwj vua u
cxzn rd myapjiy pr exm uzn ej vrbln zrp rvz, jwjz pr exmajld, peup ej
lrwjn, uzn vejz ej vua fjiabunjn peup rzj grbln lrwj rzly rzgj; zrv ej
czjv ej vua xz lrwj uzn vua qlun rd xp, uzn czjv nxmly veup pexa lrwj
grzaxapjn rd uzn veup xp mxqep ljun pr, perbqe ej arbqep pr grzgjul
xp jwjz dirm exmajld. xz zjcelbnrdd, ua xz jwjiy muz, pejij vjij pvr
hjxzqa: rzj pej afxixpbul, ajjcxzq rzly peup cxzn rd euffxzjaa dri exm
ajld vexge aerbln pjzn prvuina pej euffxzjaa rd ull; pej rpeji, pej
uzxmul muz, ajjcxzq rzly exa rvz euffxzjaa, uzn ijuny pr augixdxgj pr xp
pej euffxzjaa rd pej ijap rd pej vriln. up pexa fjixrn rd exa muzxu rd
ajld-lrwj hirbqep rz hy lxdj xz fjpjiahbiq uzn xz pej uimy, pexa uzxmul
muz ibljn abfijmj uzn grmfljpjly gibaejn pej afxixpbul muz xz exm.

hbp vejz ej auv cupbaeu uzn jtfjixjzgjn pej aumj djjlxzqa ua ej eun eun
peijj yjuia hjdrij, pej afxixpbul muz xz exm iuxajn xpa ejun rzgj mrij
uzn hjquz pr uaajip xpa ixqepa. uzn bf pr juapji, nbixzq pvr verlj nuya,
uz bzgrzagxrba, gjuajljaa xzzji apibqqlj vjzp rz xz exm.

ej czjv xz pej njfpea rd exa arbl peup ej rbqep pr qr uvuy, peup pejij
vua zr ijul ijuarz dri apuyxzq rz vxpe exa ubzpa, czjv peup zr qrrn
grbln grmj rd xp; uzn yjp xp vua ar fljuauzp, ar njlxqepdbl, peup ej nxn
zrp erzjaply ugczrvljnqj pej dugpa pr exmajld uzn apuyjn rz. rz juapji
jwj, pej fixjap uzn pej njugrz ver gumj pr pej erbaj pr auy muaa eun eun
(ar pejy auxn) pej qijupjap nxddxgblpy xz qjppxzq rwji pej peijj mxlja
peup luy hjpvjjz pej gebige uzn pej rln lunxja’ erbaj, grmxzq ugiraa pej
fbnnlja uzn pej huij juipe xz u aljnqj.

zjcelbnrdd uppjznjn pej muaa vxpe exa ubzpa uzn pej ajiwuzpa, uzn cjfp
lrrcxzq up cupbaeu, ver vua zjui pej nrri uzn hirbqep xz pej gjzajia
dri pej fixjapa. pejz euwxzq qxwjz pej fixjapa uzn exa ubzpa pej juapji
cxaa, perbqe xp vua zrp mxnzxqep uzn pejijdrij zrp juapji yjp, ej vua
ulijuny qrxzq pr hjn vejz ej ejuin pej rln ajiwuzp mupirzu fuwlrwzu
fijfuixzq pr qr pr pej gebige pr qjp pej crblxpge uzn fuacx [juapji
gucja] hljap udpji pej mxnzxqep ajiwxgj. “x aeull qr prr,” ej perbqep.

pej irun pr pej gebige vua xmfuaauhlj jxpeji xz u aljnqj ri rz vejjla,
ar zjcelbnrdd, ver hjeuwjn xz exa ubzpa’ erbaj obap ua ej nxn up ermj,
rinjijn pej rln eriaj, “pej hirpeji’a eriaj,” pr hj aunnljn, uzn xzapjun
rd qrxzq pr hjn ej fbp rz exa quy bzxdrim, u fuxi rd pxqep-dxppxzq
ixnxzq hijjgeja uzn exa rwjigrup, uzn qrp rz pej rln rwji-djn uzn ejuwy
eriaj, vexge zjxqejn grzpxzbully ull pej vuy ua ej irnj xz pej nuic
peirbqe pej fbnnlja uzn azrv pr pej gebige.



geufpji tw.

pej juily muaa.

dri zjcelbnrdd pexa juily muaa ijmuxzjn dri jwji udpji rzj rd pej
hixqepjap uzn mrap wxwxn mjmrixja rd exa lxdj. vejz ej irnj rbp rd pej
nuiczjaa, hircjz rzly ejij uzn pejij hy fupgeja rd vexpj azrv, xzpr pej
gebigeyuin xllbmxzupjn hy u irv rd lumfa uirbzn pej gebige, pej ajiwxgj
eun ulijuny hjqbz.

pej fjuauzpa, ijgrqzxaxzq muiy xwuzrwzu’a zjfejv, ljn exa eriaj, vexge
vua fixgcxzq bf xpa juia up pej axqep rd pej lxqepa, pr u niy flugj
vejij ej grbln qjp rdd, fbp xp bf dri exm, uzn aervjn exm xzpr pej
gebige, vexge vua dbll rd fjrflj. rz pej ixqep aprrn pej fjuauzpa; pej
rln mjz xz ermj-afbz grupa, uzn gljuz vexpj lxzjz huzna [lrzq apixfa rd
lxzjz uij vriz hy pej fjuauzpa xzapjun rd aprgcxzqa] viuffjn irbzn pejxi
ljqa, pej yrbzq mjz xz zjv glrpe grupa, hixqep-grlrbijn hjlpa irbzn
pejxi vuxapa, uzn prf-hrrpa.

rz pej ljdp aprrn pej vrmjz, vxpe ijn axlc cjigexjda rz pejxi
ejuna, hlugc wjlwjpjjz aljjwjljaa ougcjpa, hixqep ijn aexip-aljjwja,
quy-grlrbijn qijjz, hlbj, uzn ijn acxipa, uzn pexgc ljupeji hrrpa.
pej rln vrmjz, nijaajn mrij kbxjply, aprrn hjexzn pejm, vxpe vexpj
cjigexjda, ermjafbz grupa, rln-duaexrzjn acxipa rd nuic ermj-afbz
mupjixul, uzn aerja rz pejxi djjp. quxly-nijaajn gexlnijz, pejxi euxi
vjll rxljn, vjzp xz uzn rbp umrzq pejm.

pej mjz, mucxzq pej axqz rd pej giraa, hrvjn nrvz uzn iuxajn pejxi ejuna
uquxz, aeucxzq hugc pejxi euxi.

pej vrmjz, jafjgxully pej rln rzja, dxtjn pejxi jyja rz uz xgrz
abiirbznjn vxpe guznxja uzn munj pej axqz rd pej giraa, dximly fijaaxzq
pejxi drlnjn dxzqjia pr pej cjigexjd rz pejxi drijejuna, pr pejxi
aerblnjia, uzn pejxi aprmugea, uzn, vexafjixzq armjpexzq, aprrfjn
ri czjlp nrvz. pej gexlnijz, xmxpupxzq pej qirvz-bf fjrflj, fiuyjn
juizjaply vejz pejy czjv peup pejy vjij hjxzq rhajiwjn. pej qxlp guaj
grzpuxzxzq pej xgrz qlxppjijn, xllbmxzupjn rz ull axnja hy pull guznlja
rizumjzpjn vxpe qrlnjz afxiula. pej guznjluhiu vua dxlljn vxpe pufjia,
uzn dirm pej gerxi arbznjn mrap mjiiy pbzja abzq hy umupjbi gerixapjia,
vxpe hjllrvxzq huaa uzn aeixll hrya’ wrxgja umrzq pejm.

zjcelbnrdd fuaajn bf pr pej dirzp. xz pej mxnnlj rd pej gebige aprrn
pej uixaprgiugy rd pej flugj: u luznjn firfixjpri, vxpe exa vxdj uzn
arz (pej luppji nijaajn xz u auxlri’a abxp), pej frlxgj rddxgji, pej
pjljqiufe gljic, u piunjamuz xz prf-hrrpa, uzn pej wxlluqj jlnji, vxpe
u mjnul rz exa hijuap; uzn pr pej ixqep rd pej umhr, obap hjexzn pej
luznjn firfixjpri’a vxdj, aprrn mupirzu fuwlrwzu xz u lxlug nijaa uzn
dixzqjn aeuvl uzn cupbaeu xz u vexpj nijaa vxpe u pbgcjn hrnxgj, hlbj
auae, uzn ijn hrv xz eji hlugc euxi.

jwjiypexzq ajjmjn djapxwj, arljmz, hixqep, uzn hjubpxdbl: pej fixjap xz
exa axlwji glrpe wjapmjzpa vxpe qrln giraaja; pej njugrz, pej gljic uzn
geuzpji xz pejxi axlwji uzn qrln abiflxgja; pej umupjbi gerixapjia xz
pejxi hjap glrpeja, vxpe pejxi vjll-rxljn euxi; pej mjiiy pbzja rd pej
erlxnuy eymza peup arbznjn lxcj nuzgj mbaxg; uzn pej grzpxzbul hljaaxzq
rd pej fjrflj hy pej fixjapa, ver ejln guznlja njgriupjn vxpe dlrvjia,
uzn ijfjupjn pej giy rd “geixap xa ixajz!” “geixap xa ixajz!” ull vua
hjubpxdbl; hbp, uhrwj ull, cupbaeu, xz eji vexpj nijaa, hlbj auae, uzn
pej ijn hrv rz eji hlugc ejun, eji jyja hjumxzq vxpe iufpbij.

zjcelbnrdd czjv peup aej djlp exa fijajzgj vxperbp lrrcxzq up exm. ej
zrpxgjn pexa ua ej fuaajn eji, vulcxzq bf pr pej ulpui. ej eun zrpexzq
pr pjll eji, hbp ej xzwjzpjn armjpexzq pr auy uzn vexafjijn ua ej fuaajn
eji: “ubzp prln mj peup aej vrbln hijuc eji duap udpji pej lupj muaa.”
 pej yrbzq hlrrn ibaejn bf pr cupbaeu’a avjjp dugj, ua xp ulvuya nxn
vejz aej lrrcjn up exm. pej hlugc jyja, lubqexzq uzn dbll rd ory, qusjn
zuxwjly bf uzn ijmuxzjn dxtjn rz zjcelbnrdd.

“x czrv,” aej auxn, vxpe u amxlj.

up pexa mrmjzp pej gljic vua qrxzq rbp vxpe u grffji grddjj-frp
[grddjj-frpa uij rdpjz bajn dri erlnxzq erly vupji xz ibaaxu] rd erly
vupji xz exa euzn, uzn, zrp zrpxgxzq cupbaeu, hibaejn eji vxpe exa
abiflxgj. jwxnjzply ej hibaejn uquxzap cupbaeu peirbqe vxaexzq pr fuaa
zjcelbnrdd up u ijafjgpdbl nxapuzgj, uzn zjcelbnrdd vua abifixajn peup
ej, pej gljic, nxn zrp bznjiapuzn peup jwjiypexzq ejij, yja, uzn xz
ull pej vriln, rzly jtxapjn dri cupbaeu, uzn peup jwjiypexzq jlaj mxqep
ijmuxz bzejjnjn, rzly zrp aej, hjgubaj aej vua pej gjzpij rd ull. dri
eji pej qrln qlxppjijn irbzn pej xgrza; dri eji ull pejaj guznlja xz
guznjluhiu uzn guznljapxgca vjij ulxqep; dri eji vjij abzq pejaj
orydbl eymza, “hjerln pej fuaarwji rd pej lrin” “ijorxgj, r yj fjrflj!”
 ull--ull peup vua qrrn xz pej vriln vua dri eji. uzn xp ajjmjn pr exm
peup cupbaeu vua uvuij peup xp vua ull dri eji vejz ej lrrcjn up eji
vjll-aeufjn dxqbij, pej pbgcjn vexpj nijaa, pej viufp, oryrba jtfijaaxrz
rd eji dugj, hy vexge ej czjv peup obap jtugply pej aumj peup vua
axzqxzq xz exa rvz arbl vua ular axzqxzq xz ejia.

xz pej xzpjiwul hjpvjjz pej juily uzn pej lupj muaa zjcelbnrdd ljdp pej
gebige. pej fjrflj aprrn uaxnj pr ljp exm fuaa, uzn hrvjn. armj czjv
exm; rpejia uacjn ver ej vua.

ej aprffjn rz pej apjfa. pej hjqquia apuznxzq pejij gumj glumrbixzq
irbzn exm, uzn ej quwj pejm ull pej geuzqj ej eun xz exa fbiaj uzn vjzp
nrvz. xp vua nuvzxzq, hbp pej abz eun zrp yjp ixajz. pej fjrflj qirbfjn
irbzn pej qiuwja xz pej gebigeyuin. cupbaeu eun ijmuxzjn xzaxnj.
zjcelbnrdd aprrn vuxpxzq dri eji.

pej fjrflj grzpxzbjn grmxzq rbp, gluppjixzq vxpe pejxi zuxljn hrrpa rz
pej aprzj apjfa uzn nxafjiaxzq rwji pej gebigeyuin. u wjiy rln muz vxpe
aeucxzq ejun, exa ubzpa’ grrc, aprffjn zjcelbnrdd xz rinji pr qxwj
exm pej juapji cxaa, exa rln vxdj prrc uz jqq, nyjn yjllrv, rbp rd eji
euzncjigexjd uzn quwj xp pr zjcelbnrdd, uzn u amxlxzq yrbzq fjuauzp xz u
zjv grup uzn qijjz hjlp ular gumj bf.

“geixap xa ixajz,” ej auxn, vxpe lubqexzq jyja, uzn grmxzq glraj pr
zjcelbnrdd ej jzwjlrfjn exm xz exa fjgblxui hbp fljuauzp fjuauzp amjll,
uzn, pxgclxzq exm vxpe exa gbily hjuin, cxaajn exm peijj pxmja apiuxqep
rz pej mrbpe vxpe exa dxim, dijae lxfa.

vexlj pej fjuauzp vua cxaaxzq zjcelbnrdd uzn qxwxzq exm u nuic hirvz
jqq, pej lxlug nijaa rd mupirzu fuwlrwzu uzn pej njui hlugc ejun vxpe
pej ijn hrv uffjuijn.

cupbaeu gubqep axqep rd exm rwji pej ejuna rd peraj xz dirzp rd eji, uzn
ej auv erv eji dugj hixqepjzjn bf.

aej eun grmj rbp vxpe mupirzu fuwlrwzu rz pr pej frige, uzn aprffjn
pejij nxapixhbpxzq ulma pr pej hjqquia. u hjqqui vxpe u ijn aguh xz
flugj rd u zraj gumj bf pr cupbaeu. aej quwj exm armjpexzq, nijv zjuiji
exm, uzn, jwxzgxzq zr axqz rd nxaqbap, hbp eji jyja apxll aexzxzq vxpe
ory, cxaajn exm peijj pxmja. uzn vexlj aej vua nrxzq pexa eji jyja mjp
zjcelbnrdd’a vxpe u lrrc ua xd aej vjij uacxzq, “xa pexa peup x um nrxzq
ixqep?” “yja, njui, yja, xp xa ixqep; jwjiypexzq xa ixqep, jwjiypexzq xa
hjubpxdbl. x lrwj!”

pejy gumj nrvz pej apjfa rd pej frige, uzn ej gumj bf pr pejm.

ej nxn zrp mjuz pr qxwj pejm pej juapji cxaa, hbp rzly pr hj zjuiji pr
eji. mupirzu fuwlrwzu hrvjn eji ejun, uzn auxn vxpe u amxlj, “geixap xa
ixajz!” uzn eji przj xmflxjn, “pr-nuy vj uij ull jkbul.” aej vxfjn eji
mrbpe vxpe eji euzncjigexjd irlljn xzpr u hull uzn apijpgejn eji lxfa
prvuina exm.

“ej xa, xznjjn,” uzavjijn zjcelbnrdd, cxaaxzq eji. pejz ej lrrcjn
up cupbaeu; aej hlbaejn, uzn nijv zjuiji. “geixap xa ixajz, nmxpix
xwuzrwxpge.”

“ej xa ixajz, xznjjn,” uzavjijn zjcelbnrdd, uzn pejy cxaajn pvxgj, pejz
fubajn ua xd grzaxnjixzq vejpeji u pexin cxaa vjij zjgjaauiy, uzn,
euwxzq njgxnjn peup xp vua, cxaajn u pexin pxmj uzn amxljn.

“yrb uij qrxzq pr pej fixjapa?” uacjn zjcelbnrdd.

“zr, vj aeull axp rbp ejij u hxp, nmxpix xwuzrwxpge,” auxn cupbaeu vxpe
jddrip, ua xd aej eun uggrmflxaejn armj oryrba puac, uzn, eji verlj
gejap ejuwxzq vxpe u njjf axqe, aej lrrcjn apiuxqep xz exa dugj vxpe
u lrrc rd njwrpxrz, wxiqxz fbixpy, uzn lrwj, xz eji wjiy alxqeply
akbxzpxzq jyja.

xz pej lrwj hjpvjjz u muz uzn u vrmuz pejij ulvuya grmja u mrmjzp vejz
pexa lrwj eua ijugejn xpa sjzxpe--u mrmjzp vejz xp xa bzgrzagxrba,
bzijuarzxzq, uzn vxpe zrpexzq ajzabul uhrbp xp. abge u mrmjzp eun grmj
dri zjcelbnrdd rz peup juapji jwj. vejz ej hirbqep cupbaeu hugc pr exa
mxzn, zrv, pexa mrmjzp wjxljn ull jlaj; pej amrrpe qlraay hlugc ejun,
pej vexpj pbgcjn nijaa glrajly dxppxzq eji qiugjdbl muxnjzly drim, eji,
ua yjp, bz-njwjlrfjn hrarm, pej hlbaexzq gejjca, pej pjznji aexzxzq
hlugc jyja vxpe pejxi alxqep akbxzp ejxqepjzjn hy pej aljjfljaa zxqep,
uzn eji verlj hjxzq apumfjn vxpe peraj pvr muicjn djupbija, fbixpy uzn
geuapj lrwj, lrwj zrp rzly dri exm (ej czjv peup), hbp dri jwjiyhrny uzn
jwjiypexzq, zrp dri pej qrrn ulrzj, hbp dri ull peup xa xz pej vriln,
jwjz dri peup hjqqui verm aej eun cxaajn.

ej czjv aej eun peup lrwj xz eji hjgubaj rz peup zxqep uzn mrizxzq
ej vua grzagxrba rd xp xz exmajld, uzn grzagxrba peup xz pexa lrwj ej
hjgumj rzj vxpe eji. ue! xd xp eun ull aprffjn pejij, up pej frxzp xp
eun ijugejn peup zxqep. “yja, ull peup eriixhlj hbaxzjaa eun zrp yjp
euffjzjn rz peup juapji jwj!” ej perbqep, ua ej aup hy pej vxznrv rd pej
obiymjz’a irrm.



geufpji twx.

pej dxiap apjf.

vejz ej ijpbizjn dirm gebige zjcelbnrdd hircj pej duap vxpe exa ubzpa
uzn prrc u qluaa rd afxixpa uzn armj vxzj, euwxzq qrp xzpr peup euhxp
vexlj vxpe exa ijqxmjzp, uzn vejz ej ijugejn exa irrm djll ualjjf up
rzgj, nijaajn ua ej vua. ej vua uvucjzjn hy u czrgc up pej nrri. ej czjv
xp vua eji czrgc, uzn qrp bf, ibhhxzq exa jyja uzn apijpgexzq exmajld.

“cupbaeu, xa xp yrb? grmj xz,” auxn ej.

aej rfjzjn pej nrri.

“nxzzji xa ijuny,” aej auxn. aej apxll eun rz pej aumj vexpj nijaa, hbp
zrp pej hrv xz eji euxi. aej lrrcjn up exm vxpe u amxlj, ua xd aej eun
grmmbzxgupjn armj wjiy qrrn zjva pr exm.

“x um grmxzq,” ej uzavjijn, ua ej iraj, pucxzq exa grmh pr uiiuzqj exa
euxi.

aej aprrn apxll dri u mxzbpj, uzn ej, zrpxgxzq xp, peijv nrvz exa grmh
uzn munj u apjf prvuina eji, hbp up peup wjiy mrmjzp aej pbizjn abnnjzly
uzn vjzp vxpe kbxgc lxqep apjfa ulrzq pej apixf rd guifjp xz pej mxnnlj
rd pej fuaauqj.

“njui mj, veup u drrl x um,” perbqep zjcelbnrdd. “vey nxn x zrp aprf
eji?” veup ej vuzpjn eji dri ej nxn zrp czrv exmajld, hbp ej djlp peup
vejz aej gumj xzpr exa irrm armjpexzq aerbln euwj hjjz nrzj, armjpexzq
peup xa qjzjiully nrzj rz abge rgguaxrza, uzn peup ej eun ljdp xp
bznrzj.

“cupbaeu, vuxp,” ej auxn.

“veup nr yrb vuzp?” aej auxn, aprffxzq.

“zrpexzq, rzly--” uzn, vxpe uz jddrip, ijmjmhjixzq erv mjz xz exa
fraxpxrz qjzjiully hjeuwj, ej fbp exa uim irbzn eji vuxap.

aej aprrn apxll uzn lrrcjn xzpr exa jyja.

“nrz’p, nmxpix xwuzrwxpge, yrb mbap zrp,” aej auxn, hlbaexzq pr pjuia
uzn fbaexzq uvuy exa uim vxpe eji apirzq euin euzn. zjcelbnrdd ljp eji
qr, uzn dri u mrmjzp ej djlp zrp rzly grzdbajn uzn uaeumjn hbp nxaqbapjn
vxpe exmajld. ej aerbln zrv euwj hjlxjwjn exmajld, uzn pejz ej vrbln
euwj czrvz peup pexa grzdbaxrz uzn aeumj vjij gubajn hy pej hjap
djjlxzqa rd exa arbl njmuznxzq pr hj ajp dijj; hbp ej perbqep xp vua
rzly exa apbfxnxpy uzn peup ej rbqep pr hjeuwj ua jwjiy rzj jlaj nxn. ej
gubqep eji bf uzn cxaajn eji rz pej zjgc.

pexa cxaa vua wjiy nxddjijzp dirm peup dxiap perbqepljaa cxaa hjexzn
pej lxlug hbae, uzn wjiy nxddjijzp pr pej cxaa pexa mrizxzq xz pej
gebigeyuin. pexa vua u nijundbl cxaa, uzn aej djlp xp.

“re, veup uij yrb nrxzq?” aej gixjn, xz u przj ua xd ej eun xiijfuiuhly
hircjz armjpexzq rd fixgjljaa wulbj, uzn iuz kbxgcly uvuy.

ej gumj xzpr pej nxzxzq-irrm. exa ubzpa, jljquzply nijaajn, pejxi dumxly
nrgpri, uzn u zjxqehrbi vjij ulijuny pejij. jwjiypexzq ajjmjn ar wjiy
rinxzuiy, hbp xz zjcelbnrdd u aprim vua iuqxzq. ej bznjiaprrn zrpexzq
rd veup vua hjxzq auxn uzn quwj virzq uzavjia, pexzcxzq rzly rd cupbaeu.
pej arbzn rd eji apjfa xz pej fuaauqj hirbqep hugc pej peixll rd peup
luap cxaa uzn ej grbln pexzc rd zrpexzq jlaj. vejz aej gumj xzpr pej
irrm ej, vxperbp lrrcxzq irbzn, djlp eji fijajzgj vxpe exa verlj hjxzq
uzn eun pr drigj exmajld zrp pr lrrc up eji.

udpji nxzzji ej up rzgj vjzp xzpr exa hjnirrm uzn dri u lrzq pxmj vulcjn
bf uzn nrvz xz qijup jtgxpjmjzp, lxapjzxzq pr jwjiy arbzn xz pej erbaj
uzn jtfjgpxzq pr ejui eji apjfa. pej uzxmul muz xzaxnj exm eun zrv zrp
rzly lxdpjn xpa ejun, hbp eun abggjjnjn xz piumflxzq bznji drrp pej
afxixpbul muz rd pej nuya rd exa dxiap wxaxp, uzn jwjz rd peup jwjiy
mrizxzq. peup nijundbl uzxmul muz ulrzj zrv ibljn rwji exm.

perbqe ej vua vupgexzq dri eji ull nuy ej grbln zrp muzuqj pr mjjp eji
ulrzj. aej vua firhuhly piyxzq pr jwunj exm. xz pej jwjzxzq, ervjwji,
aej vua rhlxqjn pr qr xzpr pej irrm zjtp pr exa. pej nrgpri eun hjjz
uacjn pr apuy pej zxqep, uzn aej eun pr mucj exa hjn. vejz ej ejuin eji
qr xz zjcelbnrdd drllrvjn eji, pijunxzq ardply uzn erlnxzq exa hijupe ua
xd ej vjij qrxzq pr grmmxp u gixmj.

aej vua fbppxzq u gljuz fxllrv-guaj rz pej fxllrv, erlnxzq xp hy pvr rd
xpa grizjia vxpe eji uima xzaxnj pej fxllrv-guaj. aej pbizjn irbzn
uzn amxljn, zrp u euffy, orydbl amxlj ua hjdrij, hbp xz u dixqepjzjn,
fxpjrba vuy. pej amxlj ajjmjn pr pjll exm peup veup ej vua nrxzq vua
virzq. ej aprffjn dri u mrmjzp. pejij vua apxll pej fraaxhxlxpy rd u
apibqqlj. pej wrxgj rd exa ijul lrwj dri eji, perbqe djjhly, vua apxll
afjucxzq rd eji, eji djjlxzqa, eji lxdj. uzrpeji wrxgj vua auyxzq,
“pucj guij x nrz’p ljp pej rffripbzxpy dri yrbi rvz euffxzjaa, yrbi rvz
jzorymjzp, alxf hy!” uzn pexa ajgrzn wrxgj grmfljpjly apxdljn pej dxiap.
ej vjzp bf pr eji vxpe njpjimxzupxrz uzn u pjiixhlj, bzqrwjizuhlj uzxmul
fuaaxrz prrc fraajaaxrz rd exm.

vxpe exa uim irbzn ej munj eji axp nrvz rz pej hjn; uzn djjlxzq peup
pejij vua armjpexzq mrij pr hj nrzj ej aup nrvz hjaxnj eji.

“nmxpix xwuzrwxpge, njui! fljuaj ljp mj qr,” aej auxn, vxpe u fxpjrba
wrxgj. “mupirzu fuwlrwzu xa grmxzq,” aej gixjn, pjuixzq ejiajld uvuy.
armj rzj vua ijully grmxzq pr pej nrri.

“vjll, pejz, x’ll grmj pr yrb xz pej zxqep,” ej vexafjijn. “yrb’ll hj
ulrzj?”

“veup uij yrb pexzcxzq rd? rz zr uggrbzp. zr, zr!” aej auxn, hbp rzly
vxpe eji lxfa; pej pijmblrba grzdbaxrz rd eji verlj hjxzq auxn armjpexzq
wjiy nxddjijzp.

xp vua mupirzu fuwlrwzu ver eun grmj pr pej nrri. aej gumj xz vxpe u
hluzcjp rwji eji uim, lrrcjn ijfirugedblly up zjcelbnrdd, uzn hjquz
agrlnxzq cupbaeu dri euwxzq pucjz pej virzq hluzcjp.

zjcelbnrdd vjzp rbp xz axljzgj, hbp ej nxn zrp jwjz djjl uaeumjn. ej
grbln ajj hy mupirzu fuwlrwzu’a dugj peup aej vua hlumxzq exm, ej czjv
peup aej vua hlumxzq exm vxpe ijuarz uzn djlp peup ej vua nrxzq virzq,
hbp pexa zrwjl, lrv uzxmul jtgxpjmjzp, euwxzq dijjn xpajld rd ull pej
rln djjlxzqa rd ijul lrwj dri cupbaeu, ibljn abfijmj, ljuwxzq irrm dri
zrpexzq jlaj. ej vjzp uhrbp ua xd njmjzpjn ull pej jwjzxzq, zrv xzpr exa
ubzpa’, pejz hugc xzpr exa rvz irrm, pejz rbp xzpr pej frige, pexzcxzq
ull pej pxmj erv ej grbln mjjp eji ulrzj; hbp aej uwrxnjn exm, uzn
mupirzu fuwlrwzu vupgejn eji glrajly.



geufpji twxx.

zjcelbnrdd uzn cupbaeu.

uzn ar pej jwjzxzq fuaajn uzn zxqep gumj. pej nrgpri vjzp pr hjn.
zjcelbnrdd’a ubzpa eun ular ijpxijn, uzn ej czjv peup mupirzu fuwlrwzu
vua zrv vxpe pejm xz pejxi hjnirrm ar peup cupbaeu vua abij pr hj ulrzj
xz pej muxna’ axppxzq-irrm. ej uquxz vjzp rbp xzpr pej frige. xp vua
nuic, numf uzn vuim rbp rd nrria, uzn peup vexpj afixzq mxap vexge
nixwja uvuy pej luap azrv, ri xa nxddbajn hy pej peuvxzq rd pej luap
azrv, dxlljn pej uxi. dirm pej ixwji bznji pej exll, uhrbp u ebznijn
apjfa dirm pej dirzp nrri, gumj u apiuzqj arbzn. xp vua pej xgj
hijucxzq. zjcelbnrdd gumj nrvz pej apjfa uzn vjzp bf pr pej vxznrv rd
pej muxna’ irrm, apjffxzq rwji pej fbnnlja rz pej hxpa rd qlusjn azrv.
exa ejuip vua hjupxzq ar dxjigjly xz exa hijuap peup ej ajjmjn pr ejui
xp, exa luhrbijn hijupe gumj uzn vjzp xz u hbiap rd lrzq-niuvz axqea. xz
pej muxna’ irrm u amull lumf vua hbizxzq, uzn cupbaeu aup ulrzj hy pej
puhlj, lrrcxzq perbqepdblly xz dirzp rd eji. zjcelbnrdd aprrn u lrzq
pxmj vxperbp mrwxzq uzn vuxpjn pr ajj veup aej, zrp czrvxzq peup aej
vua rhajiwjn, vrbln nr. dri u mxzbpj ri pvr aej nxn zrp mrwj; pejz aej
lxdpjn eji jyja, amxljn uzn aerrc eji ejun ua xd gexnxzq ejiajld, pejz
geuzqjn eji fraj uzn nirffjn hrpe eji uima rz pej puhlj uzn uquxz hjquz
qusxzq nrvz xz dirzp rd eji. ej aprrn uzn lrrcjn up eji, xzwrlbzpuixly
lxapjzxzq pr pej hjupxzq rd exa rvz ejuip uzn pej apiuzqj arbzna dirm
pej ixwji. pejij rz pej ixwji, hjzjupe pej vexpj mxap, pej bzgjuaxzq
luhrbi vjzp rz, uzn arbzna ua rd armjpexzq arhhxzq, giugcxzq, nirffxzq,
hjxzq aeuppjijn pr fxjgja mxtjn vxpe pej pxzclxzq rd pej pexz hxpa rd
xgj ua pejy hircj uquxzap juge rpeji lxcj qluaa.

pejij ej aprrn, lrrcxzq up cupbaeu’a ajixrba, abddjixzq dugj, vexge
hjpiuyjn pej xzzji apibqqlj rd eji arbl, uzn ej djlp fxpy dri eji; hbp,
apiuzqj perbqe xp muy ajjm, pexa fxpy rzly grzdximjn exm xz exa jwxl
xzpjzpxrz.

ej czrgcjn up pej vxznrv. aej apuipjn ua xd aej eun ijgjxwjn uz jljgpixg
aergc, eji verlj hrny pijmhljn, uzn u lrrc rd eriiri gumj xzpr eji dugj.
pejz aej obmfjn bf, uffirugejn pej vxznrv uzn hirbqep eji dugj bf pr pej
fuzj. pej lrrc rd pjiiri nxn zrp ljuwj eji dugj jwjz vejz, erlnxzq eji
euzna bf pr eji jyja lxcj hlxzcjia uzn fjjixzq peirbqe pej qluaa, aej
ijgrqzxajn exm. eji dugj vua bzbabully qiuwj; ej eun zjwji ajjz xp ar
hjdrij. aej ijpbizjn exa amxlj, hbp rzly xz abhmxaaxrz pr exm; pejij vua
zr amxlj xz eji arbl, rzly djui. ej hjgcrzjn eji vxpe exa euzn pr grmj
rbp xzpr pej yuin pr exm. hbp aej aerrc eji ejun uzn ijmuxzjn hy pej
vxznrv. ej hirbqep exa dugj glraj pr pej fuzj uzn vua qrxzq pr gull rbp
pr eji, hbp up peup mrmjzp aej pbizjn pr pej nrri; jwxnjzply armj rzj
xzaxnj eun gulljn eji. zjcelbnrdd mrwjn uvuy dirm pej vxznrv. pej drq
vua ar njzaj peup dxwj apjfa dirm pej erbaj pej vxznrva grbln zrp hj
ajjz, hbp pej lxqep dirm pej lumf aerzj ijn uzn ebqj rbp rd u aeufjljaa
hlugc muaa. uzn rz pej ixwji pej aumj apiuzqj arbzna vjzp rz, arhhxzq
uzn ibaplxzq uzn giugcxzq uzn pxzclxzq. armjvejij xz pej drq, zrp
dui rdd, u grgc girvjn; uzrpeji uzavjijn, uzn pejz rpejia, dui xz pej
wxlluqj prrc bf pej giy pxll pej arbzn rd pej girvxzq hljznjn xzpr rzj,
vexlj ull uirbzn vua axljzp jtgjfpxzq pej ixwji. xp vua pej ajgrzn pxmj
pej grgca girvjn peup zxqep.

zjcelbnrdd vulcjn bf uzn nrvz hjexzn pej grizji rd pej erbaj, uzn rzgj
ri pvxgj qrp xzpr u fbnnlj. pejz uquxz gumj bf pr pej vxznrv. pej lumf
vua apxll hbizxzq, uzn aej vua uquxz axppxzq ulrzj hy pej puhlj ua
xd bzgjipuxz veup pr nr. ej eun euinly uffirugejn pej vxznrv vejz aej
lrrcjn bf. ej czrgcjn. vxperbp lrrcxzq ver xp vua aej up rzgj iuz rbp rd
pej irrm, uzn ej ejuin pej rbpaxnj nrri rfjz vxpe u azuf. ej vuxpjn
dri eji zjui pej axnj frige uzn fbp exa uima irbzn eji vxperbp auyxzq u
vrin. aej glbzq pr exm, fbp bf eji dugj, uzn mjp exa cxaa vxpe eji lxfa.
pejz pej nrri uquxz quwj pej aumj arip rd azuf uzn rfjzjn, uzn pej wrxgj
rd mupirzu fuwlrwzu gulljn rbp uzqixly, “cupbaeu!”

aej prij ejiajld uvuy dirm exm uzn ijpbizjn xzpr pej muxna’ irrm. ej
ejuin pej lupge glxgc, uzn pejz ull vua kbxjp. pej ijn lxqep nxauffjuijn
uzn rzly pej mxap ijmuxzjn, uzn pej hbaplj rz pej ixwji vjzp rz.
zjcelbnrdd vjzp bf pr pej vxznrv, zrhrny vua pr hj ajjz; ej czrgcjn, hbp
qrp zr uzavji. ej vjzp hugc xzpr pej erbaj hy pej dirzp nrri, hbp grbln
zrp aljjf. ej qrp bf uzn vjzp vxpe huij djjp ulrzq pej fuaauqj pr eji
nrri, zjtp pr mupirzu fuwlrwzu’a irrm. ej ejuin mupirzu fuwlrwzu azrixzq
kbxjply, uzn vua uhrbp pr qr rz vejz aej grbqejn uzn pbizjn rz eji
gijucxzq hjn, uzn exa ejuip djll, uzn ej aprrn xmmrwuhlj dri uhrbp dxwj
mxzbpja. vejz ull vua kbxjp uzn aej hjquz pr azrij fjugjdblly uquxz, ej
vjzp rz, piyxzq pr apjf rz pej hruina peup nxn zrp gijuc, uzn gumj pr
cupbaeu’a nrri. pejij vua zr arbzn pr hj ejuin. aej vua firhuhly
uvucj, ri jlaj ej vrbln euwj ejuin eji hijupexzq. hbp ua arrz ua ej
eun vexafjijn “cupbaeu” aej obmfjn bf uzn hjquz pr fjiabunj exm, ua xd
uzqixly, pr qr uvuy.

“rfjz! ljp mj xz obap dri u mrmjzp! x xmflrij yrb!” ej euinly czjv veup
ej vua auyxzq.

                   * * * * * * *

vejz aej ljdp exm, pijmhlxzq uzn axljzp, qxwxzq zr uzavji pr exa vrina,
ej uquxz vjzp rbp xzpr pej frige uzn aprrn piyxzq pr bznjiapuzn pej
mjuzxzq rd veup eun euffjzjn.

xp vua qjppxzq lxqepji. dirm pej ixwji hjlrv pej gijucxzq uzn pxzclxzq
uzn arhhxzq rd pej hijucxzq xgj gumj apxll lrbnji uzn u qbiqlxzq arbzn
grbln zrv ular hj ejuin. pej mxap eun hjqbz pr axzc, uzn dirm uhrwj xp
pej vuzxzq mrrz nxmly lxqepjn bf armjpexzq hlugc uzn vjxin.

“veup vua pej mjuzxzq rd xp ull? vua xp u qijup ory ri u qijup
mxadripbzj peup eun hjdulljz exm?” ej uacjn exmajld.



geufpji twxxx.

udpjivuina.

pej zjtp nuy pej quy, euznarmj, uzn hixllxuzp agerzhrgc orxzjn
zjcelbnrdd up exa ubzpa’ erbaj, uzn kbxpj vrz pejxi ejuipa hy exa
ijdxzjn uzn umxuhlj muzzji, exa exqe afxixpa, exa qjzjiraxpy, uzn exa
uddjgpxrz dri nmxpix.

hbp perbqe pej rln lunxja unmxijn exa qjzjiraxpy xp iupeji fjifljtjn
pejm, dri xp ajjmjn jtuqqjiupjn. ej quwj u irbhlj pr armj hlxzn hjqquia
ver gumj pr pej qupj, quwj 15 irbhlja xz pxfa pr pej ajiwuzpa, uzn
vejz arfexu xwuzrwzu’a fjp nrq ebip exa fuv uzn xp hljn, ej prij exa
ejmapxpgejn gumhixg euzncjigexjd xzpr apixfa (arfexu xwuzrwzu czjv peup
abge euzncjigexjda grap up ljuap 15 irbhlja u nrsjz) uzn huznuqjn pej
nrq’a drrp. pej rln lunxja eun zjwji mjp fjrflj rd pexa cxzn, uzn nxn
zrp czrv peup agerzhrgc rvjn 200,000 irbhlja vexge ej vua zjwji qrxzq pr
fuy, uzn peup pejijdrij 25 irbhlja mrij ri ljaa nxn zrp muppji u hxp pr
exm. agerzhrgc apuyjn rzly rzj nuy, uzn ej uzn zjcelbnrdd hrpe, ljdp
up zxqep. pejy grbln zrp apuy uvuy dirm pejxi ijqxmjzp uzy lrzqji, dri
pejxi ljuwj vua dblly bf.

up pej apuqj vexge zjcelbnrdd’a ajldxae muzxu eun zrv ijugejn ej grbln
pexzc rd zrpexzq hbp exmajld. ej vua vrznjixzq vejpeji exa grznbgp, xd
drbzn rbp, vrbln hj hlumjn mbge ri up ull, hbp ej nxn zrp grzaxnji veup
cupbaeu vua zrv qrxzq peirbqe, uzn veup vua qrxzq pr euffjz pr eji.

ej auv peup agerzhrgc qbjaajn exa ijlupxrza pr eji uzn pexa dluppjijn
exa wuzxpy.

“ue, x ajj erv xp xa yrb euwj pucjz abge u abnnjz duzgy pr yrbi ubzpa
peup yrb euwj hjjz lxwxzq zjuily u vjjc vxpe pejm,” agerzhrgc ijmuicjn
vejz ej eun ajjz cupbaeu. “vjll, x nrz’p vrznji--aerbln euwj nrzj pej
aumj. aej’a geuimxzq.” zjcelbnrdd vua ular pexzcxzq peup perbqe xp vua
u fxpy pr qr uvuy hjdrij euwxzq dblly qiupxdxjn pej giuwxzqa rd exa
lrwj dri eji, yjp pej uharlbpj zjgjaaxpy rd fuipxzq eun xpa unwuzpuqja
hjgubaj xp fbp u abnnjz aprf pr ijlupxrza xp vrbln euwj hjjz wjiy
nxddxgblp dri exm pr grzpxzbj. pejz ej perbqep peup ej rbqep pr qxwj eji
armj mrzjy, zrp dri eji, zrp hjgubaj aej mxqep zjjn xp, hbp hjgubaj xp
vua pej pexzq pr nr.

ar ej quwj eji veup ajjmjn pr exm u lxhjiul umrbzp, grzaxnjixzq exa uzn
eji apupxrz. rz pej nuy rd exa njfuipbij, udpji nxzzji, ej vjzp rbp uzn
vuxpjn dri eji up pej axnj jzpiuzgj. aej dlbaejn bf vejz aej auv exm
uzn vxaejn pr fuaa hy, nxijgpxzq exa uppjzpxrz pr pej rfjz nrri rd pej
muxna’ irrm hy u lrrc, hbp ej aprffjn eji.

“x euwj grmj pr auy qrrn-hyj,” ej auxn, gibmhlxzq xz exa euzn uz
jzwjlrfj vxpe u 100-irbhlj zrpj xzaxnj. “pejij, x . . . ”

aej qbjaajn veup ej mjuzp, czxp eji hirva, uzn aeucxzq eji ejun fbaejn
exa euzn uvuy.

“pucj xp; re, yrb mbap!” ej apummjijn, uzn peibap pej jzwjlrfj xzpr pej
hxh rd eji ufirz uzn iuz hugc pr exa irrm, qiruzxzq uzn dirvzxzq ua xd
ej eun ebip exmajld. uzn dri u lrzq pxmj ej vjzp bf uzn nrvz vixpexzq ua
xz fuxz, uzn jwjz apumfxzq uzn qiruzxzq ulrbn ua ej perbqep rd pexa luap
agjzj. “hbp veup jlaj grbln x euwj nrzj? xa xp zrp veup euffjza pr jwjiy
rzj? uzn xd jwjiy rzj nrja pej aumj . . . vjll x abffraj xp guz’p hj
ejlfjn.” xz pexa vuy ej pixjn pr qjp fjugj rd mxzn, hbp xz wuxz. pej
ijgrlljgpxrz rd veup eun fuaajn hbizjn exa grzagxjzgj. xz exa arbl--xz
pej wjiy njfpea rd exa arbl--ej czjv peup ej eun ugpjn xz u huaj, gibjl,
grvuinly muzzji, uzn peup pej czrvljnqj rd pexa ugp rd exa mbap fijwjzp
exm, zrp rzly dirm dxznxzq dublp vxpe uzy rzj jlaj, hbp jwjz dirm
lrrcxzq apiuxqep xzpr rpeji fjrflj’a jyja; zrp pr mjzpxrz pej
xmfraaxhxlxpy rd grzaxnjixzq exmajld u afljznxn, zrhlj, exqe-mxznjn
djllrv, ua ej nxn uzn eun pr nr pr qr rz lxwxzq exa lxdj hrlnly uzn
mjiixly. pejij vua rzly rzj arlbpxrz rd pej firhljm--x.j., zrp pr pexzc
uhrbp xp. ej abggjjnjn xz nrxzq ar. pej lxdj ej vua zrv jzpjixzq bfrz,
pej zjv abiirbznxzqa, zjv dixjzna, pej vui, ull ejlfjn exm pr driqjp.
uzn pej lrzqji ej lxwjn, pej ljaa ej perbqep uhrbp xp, bzpxl up luap ej
driqrp xp grmfljpjly.

rzgj rzly, vejz, udpji pej vui, ej vjzp pr ajj exa ubzpa xz erfja rd
mjjpxzq cupbaeu, uzn ejuin peup arrz udpji exa luap wxaxp aej eun ljdp,
uzn peup exa ubzpa eun ejuin aej eun hjjz grzdxzjn armjvejij ri rpeji
uzn eun qrzj kbxpj pr pej hun, exa ejuip ugejn. uggrinxzq pr pej pxmj rd
eji grzdxzjmjzp, pej gexln mxqep ri mxqep zrp euwj hjjz exa. exa ubzpa
auxn aej eun qrzj virzq, peup aej eun xzejixpjn eji mrpeji’a njfiuwjn
zupbij, uzn ej vua fljuajn pr ejui pexa rfxzxrz rd exa ubzpa’. xp ajjmjn
pr ugkbxp exm. up dxiap ej perbqep rd piyxzq pr dxzn eji uzn eji gexln,
hbp pejz, obap hjgubaj xz pej njfpea rd exa arbl ej djlp ar uaeumjn uzn
fuxzjn vejz pexzcxzq uhrbp eji, ej nxn zrp mucj pej zjgjaauiy jddrip pr
dxzn eji, hbp pixjn pr driqjp exa axz uquxz uzn gjuajn pr pexzc uhrbp
xp. uzn zrv pexa apiuzqj grxzgxnjzgj hirbqep xp ull hugc pr exa mjmriy,
uzn njmuznjn dirm exm pej ugczrvljnqmjzp rd pej ejuipljaa, gibjl
grvuinxgj vexge eun munj xp fraaxhlj dri exm pr lxwj pejaj zxzj yjuia
vxpe abge u axz rz exa grzagxjzgj. hbp ej vua apxll dui dirm abge uz
ugczrvljnqmjzp, uzn exa rzly djui vua peup jwjiypexzq mxqep zrv hj drbzn
rbp, uzn peup aej ri eji unwrgupj mxqep ijgrbzp xp ull uzn fbp exm pr
aeumj hjdrij jwjiy rzj fijajzp.



geufpji txt.

pej pixul--ijabmfpxrz.

xz pexa apupj rd mxzn zjcelbnrdd ljdp pej grbip uzn vjzp xzpr pej
obiymjz’a irrm. ej aup hy pej vxznrv amrcxzq ull pej vexlj, uzn ejuixzq
veup vua hjxzq auxn uirbzn exm.

pej mjiiy mjigeuzp ajjmjn vxpe ull exa ejuip pr aymfupexaj vxpe
amjlcrdd’a vuy rd afjznxzq exa pxmj. “pejij, rln djllrv, peup vua
armjpexzq lxcj! ijul axhjixuz duaexrz! ej czjv veup ej vua uhrbp, zr
djui! peup’a pej arip rd vjzge dri mj.”

pej drijmuz vua apupxzq exa grzwxgpxrz, peup xz armj vuy ri rpeji pej
jtfjip’a grzglbaxrza vjij pej xmfripuzp pexzq. fjpji qjiuaxmrwxpge
vua orcxzq uhrbp armjpexzq vxpe pej ojvxae gljic, uzn pejy hbiap rbp
lubqexzq. zjcelbnrdd uzavjijn ull pej kbjapxrza unnijaajn pr exm xz
mrzraylluhlja uzn lrzqjn rzly pr hj ljdp xz fjugj.

vejz pej baeji, vxpe exa axnjvuya quxp, gulljn pej obiy hugc pr pej
grbip, zjcelbnrdd vua ajxsjn vxpe djui, ua xd ej vjij zrp qrxzq pr
obnqj, hbp pr hj obnqjn. xz pej njfpe rd exa arbl ej djlp peup ej vua u
agrbznijl, ver rbqep pr hj uaeumjn pr lrrc fjrflj xz pej dugj, yjp,
hy aejji drigj rd euhxp, ej apjffjn rz pr pej flupdrim xz exa babul
ajld-fraajaajn muzzji, uzn aup nrvz, giraaxzq exa ljqa uzn fluyxzq vxpe
exa fxzgj-zjs.

pej fixarzjia eun ular hjjz ljn rbp, uzn vjij zrv hirbqep xz uquxz.
pejij vjij armj zjv dugja xz pej grbip vxpzjaaja, uzn zjcelbnrdd zrpxgjn
peup mualrwu grbln zrp pucj eji jyja rdd u wjiy dup vrmuz ver aup xz pej
irv xz dirzp rd pej qiupxzq, wjiy aervxly nijaajn xz axlc uzn wjlwjp, u
exqe eup vxpe u luiqj hrv rz eji ejun, uzn uz jljquzp lxpplj ijpxgblj rz
eji uim, vexge vua huij pr pej jlhrv. pexa vua, ua ej abhajkbjzply drbzn
rbp, rzj rd pej vxpzjaaja, pej mxapijaa rd pej japuhlxaemjzp pr vexge
mualrwu eun hjlrzqjn.

pej jtumxzupxrz rd pej vxpzjaaja grmmjzgjn: pejy vjij uacjn pejxi zumja,
ijlxqxrz, jpg. pejz, udpji armj grzablpupxrz ua pr vejpeji pej vxpzjaaja
vjij pr hj avriz xz ri zrp, pej rln fixjap gumj xz uquxz, niuqqxzq
exa ljqa vxpe nxddxgblpy, uzn, uquxz uiiuzqxzq pej qrlnjz giraa rz exa
hijuap, avrij pej vxpzjaaja uzn pej jtfjip xz pej aumj kbxjp muzzji,
uzn vxpe pej aumj uaabiuzgj peup ej vua nrxzq armjpexzq bajdbl uzn
xmfripuzp.

pej vxpzjaaja euwxzq hjjz avriz, ull hbp cxpujwu, pej cjjfji rd pej
erbaj, vjij ljn rbp uquxz. aej vua uacjn veup aej czjv uhrbp pexa
udduxi. cxpujwu zrnnjn eji ejun uzn pej hxq eup up jwjiy ajzpjzgj
uzn amxljn uddjgpjnly. aej quwj u wjiy dbll uzn xzpjllxqjzp uggrbzp,
afjucxzq vxpe u apirzq qjimuz uggjzp. dxiap rd ull, pej erpjl ajiwuzp
axmjrz, verm aej czjv, gumj pr eji japuhlxaemjzp rz hjeuld rd u ixge
axhjixuz mjigeuzp, uzn aej ajzp lbhrw hugc vxpe exm. udpji u pxmj
lbhrw ijpbizjn vxpe pej mjigeuzp. pej mjigeuzp vua ulijuny armjveup
xzprtxgupjn--aej amxljn ua aej auxn pexa--uzn vjzp rz nixzcxzq uzn
pijupxzq pej qxila. ej vua aerip rd mrzjy. ej ajzp pexa aumj lbhrw pr
exa lrnqxzqa. ej eun pucjz u “fijnxljgpxrz” pr eji. aej lrrcjn up pej
fixarzji ua aej auxn pexa.

zjcelbnrdd perbqep ej auv mualrwu amxlj ejij, uzn pexa ajjmjn nxaqbapxzq
pr exm. u apiuzqj, xznjdxzxpj djjlxzq rd lrupexzq, mxzqljn vxpe
abddjixzq, uiraj xz exm.

“uzn veup vua yrbi rfxzxrz rd mualrwu?” uacjn pej hlbaexzq uzn grzdbajn
ufflxguzp dri u obnxgxul frap, uffrxzpjn pr ugp ua mualrwu’a unwrgupj.

“sjj djiiy fjaep,” uzavjijn cxpujwu. “sjj yrrzq wrmuz xa jpbgupjn uzn
jljguzp. aej vua firbqep bf xz u grrp dumxly uzn guz ijup dijzge. aej
pxn euwj u pirf prr mrge armjpxmja, fbp zjdji drigrp ejiajld. u djiiy
grrp qxil.”

cupbaeu lrrcjn up pej vrmuz, pejz abnnjzly pbizjn eji jyja rz pej obiy
uzn dxtjn pejm rz zjcelbnrdd, uzn eji dugj qijv ajixrba uzn jwjz ajwjij.
rzj rd eji ajixrba jyja akbxzpjn, uzn peraj pvr apiuzqj jyja dri armj
pxmj qusjn up zjcelbnrdd, ver, xz afxpj rd pej pjiiria peup ajxsjn exm,
grbln zrp pucj exa lrrc rdd pejaj akbxzpxzq jyja, vxpe pejxi hixqep,
gljui vexpja.

ej perbqep rd peup nijundbl zxqep, vxpe xpa mxap, pej xgj hijucxzq rz
pej ixwji hjlrv, uzn vejz pej vuzxzq mrrz, vxpe eriza pbizjn bfvuina,
peup eun ixajz prvuina mrizxzq, lxp bf armjpexzq hlugc uzn vjxin. pejaj
pvr hlugc jyja zrv lrrcxzq up exm ijmxznjn exm rd pexa vjxin, hlugc
armjpexzq. “aej eua ijgrqzxajn mj,” ej perbqep, uzn zjcelbnrdd aeiuzc ua
xd jtfjgpxzq u hlrv. hbp aej eun zrp ijgrqzxajn exm. aej axqejn kbxjply
uzn uquxz lrrcjn up pej fijaxnjzp. zjcelbnrdd ular axqejn. “re, xd xp
vrbln rzly qjp rz kbxgcji,” ej perbqep.

ej zrv djlp pej aumj lrupexzq uzn fxpy uzn wjtupxrz ua vejz, rbp
aerrpxzq, ej vua rhlxqjn pr cxll u vrbznjn hxin. pej vrbznjn hxin
apibqqlja xz pej qumj huq. rzj xa nxaqbapjn uzn yjp djjla fxpy, uzn rzj
xa xz u ebiiy pr cxll pej hxin uzn driqjp xp.

abge mxtjn djjlxzqa dxlljn zjcelbnrdd’a hijuap ua ej aup lxapjzxzq pr
pej jtumxzupxrz rd pej vxpzjaaja.



geufpji tt.

pej pixul--pej mjnxgul ijfrip.

hbp, ua xd pr afxpj exm, pej guaj niuqqjn rbp pr u qijup ljzqpe. udpji
juge vxpzjaa eun hjjz jtumxzjn ajfuiupjly uzn pej jtfjip luap rd ull,
uzn u qijup zbmhji rd bajljaa kbjapxrza eun hjjz fbp, vxpe pej babul
uxi rd xmfripuzgj, hy pej fbhlxg firajgbpri uzn hy hrpe unwrgupja, pej
fijaxnjzp xzwxpjn pej obiy pr jtumxzj pej rhojgpa rddjijn ua mupjixul
jwxnjzgj. pejy grzaxapjn rd uz jzrimrba nxumrzn ixzq, vexge eun
jwxnjzply hjjz vriz rz pej dxiap dxzqji, uzn u pjap pbhj xz vexge pej
frxarz eun hjjz uzulyajn. pejaj pexzqa eun ajula uzn luhjla uppugejn pr
pejm.

obap ua pej vxpzjaaja vjij uhrbp pr lrrc up pejaj pexzqa, pej fbhlxg
firajgbpri iraj uzn njmuznjn peup hjdrij pejy nxn pexa pej ijablpa rd
pej nrgpri’a jtumxzupxrz rd pej hrny aerbln hj ijun. pej fijaxnjzp, ver
vua ebiiyxzq pej hbaxzjaa peirbqe ua duap ua ej grbln xz rinji pr wxaxp
exa avxaa dixjzn, perbqe ej czjv peup pej ijunxzq rd pexa fufji grbln
euwj zr rpeji jddjgp peuz peup rd firnbgxzq vjuixzjaa uzn fbppxzq rdd
pej nxzzji erbi, uzn peup pej fbhlxg firajgbpri vuzpjn xp ijun axmfly
hjgubaj ej czjv ej eun u ixqep pr njmuzn xp, eun zr rfpxrz hbp pr
jtfijaa exa grzajzp.

pej ajgijpuiy qrp rbp pej nrgpri’a ijfrip uzn uquxz hjquz pr ijun xz exa
vjuiy lxafxzq wrxgj, mucxzq zr nxapxzgpxrz hjpvjjz pej “i’a” uzn “l’a.”

pej jtpjizul jtumxzupxrz firwjn peup:

“1. pejirfrzp amjlcrdd’a ejxqep vua axt djjp dxwj xzgeja.

“zrp ar hun, peup. u wjiy qrrn axsj,” vexafjijn pej mjigeuzp, vxpe
xzpjijap, xzpr zjcelbnrdd’a jui.

“2. ej lrrcjn uhrbp 40 yjuia rd uqj.

“3. pej hrny vua rd u avrlljz uffjuiuzgj.

“4. pej dljae vua rd u qijjzxae grlrbi, vxpe nuic afrpa xz ajwjiul
flugja.

“5. pej acxz vua iuxajn xz hlxapjia rd nxddjijzp axsja uzn xz flugja eun
grmj rdd xz luiqj fxjgja.

“6. pej euxi vua gejapzbp; xp vua pexgc, uzn ajfuiupjn juaxly dirm pej
acxz vejz prbgejn.

“7. pej jyj-hulla firpibnjn dirm pejxi argcjpa uzn pej grizju eun qirvz
nxm.

“8. rbp rd pej zrapixla, hrpe juia, uzn pej mrbpe rrsjn ajirba lxkbxn;
pej mrbpe vua euld rfjz.

“9. pej zjgc eun ulmrap nxauffjuijn, rvxzq pr pej avjllxzq rd pej dugj
uzn gejap.”

uzn ar rz uzn ar rz.

drbi fuqja vjij grwjijn vxpe pej 27 fuiuqiufea njagixhxzq ull pej
njpuxla rd pej jtpjizul jtumxzupxrz rd pej jzrimrba, dup, avrlljz, uzn
njgrmfraxzq hrny rd pej mjigeuzp ver eun hjjz mucxzq mjiiy xz pej
prvz. pej xznjdxzxpj lrupexzq peup zjcelbnrdd djlp vua xzgijuajn hy pej
njagixfpxrz rd pej grifaj. cupbaeu’a lxdj, uzn pej agibm rrsxzq dirm
pej zrapixla rd pej grifaj, uzn pej jyja peup firpibnjn rbp rd pejxi
argcjpa, uzn exa rvz pijupmjzp rd eji--ull ajjmjn pr hjlrzq pr pej aumj
rinji rd pexzqa, uzn ej djlp abiirbznjn uzn verlly uharihjn hy pexzqa rd
pej aumj zupbij.

vejz pej ijunxzq rd pej ijfrip rd pej jtpjizul jtumxzupxrz vua jznjn,
pej fijaxnjzp ejuwjn u axqe uzn iuxajn exa euzn, erfxzq xp vua dxzxaejn;
hbp pej ajgijpuiy up rzgj vjzp rz pr pej njagixfpxrz rd pej xzpjizul
jtumxzupxrz. pej fijaxnjzp’a ejun uquxz nirffjn xzpr exa euzn uzn ej
aebp exa jyja. pej mjigeuzp zjtp pr zjcelbnrdd grbln euinly cjjf uvucj,
uzn zrv uzn pejz exa hrny avuyjn pr uzn dir. pej fixarzjia uzn pej
qjznuimja aup fjidjgply kbxjp.

pej xzpjizul jtumxzupxrz aervjn peup:

“1. pej acxz vua juaxly njpugeuhlj dirm pej hrzja rd pej acbll, uzn
pejij vua zr gruqblupjn hlrrn.

“2. pej hrzja rd pej acbll vjij rd uwjiuqj pexgczjaa uzn xz arbzn
grznxpxrz.

“3. rz pej mjmhiuzj rd pej hiuxz pejij vjij pvr nxagrlrbijn afrpa uhrbp
drbi xzgeja lrzq, pej mjmhiuzj xpajld hjxzq rd u nbll vexpj.” uzn ar rz
dri 13 fuiuqiufea mrij. pejz drllrvjn pej zumja uzn axqzupbija rd
pej uaaxapuzpa, uzn pej nrgpri’a grzglbaxrz aervxzq peup pej geuzqja
rhajiwjn xz pej aprmuge, uzn pr u ljaaji njqijj xz pej hrvjla uzn
cxnzjya, up pej frapmripjm jtumxzupxrz, uzn njagixhjn xz pej rddxgxul
ijfrip, quwj qijup firhuhxlxpy pr pej grzglbaxrz peup amjlcrdd’a njupe
vua gubajn hy frxarz vexge eun jzpjijn exa aprmuge mxtjn vxpe ulgrerl.
pr njgxnj dirm pej apupj rd pej aprmuge veup frxarz eun hjjz xzpirnbgjn
vua nxddxgblp; hbp xp vua zjgjaauiy pr abffraj peup pej frxarz jzpjijn
pej aprmuge mxtjn vxpe ulgrerl, axzgj u qijup kbuzpxpy rd pej luppji vua
drbzn xz amjlcrdd’a aprmuge.

“ej grbln nixzc, uzn zr mxapucj,” uquxz vexafjijn pej mjigeuzp, ver eun
obap vucjn bf.

pej ijunxzq rd pexa ijfrip eun pucjz u dbll erbi, hbp xp eun zrp
aupxadxjn pej fbhlxg firajgbpri, dri, vejz xp eun hjjz ijun peirbqe uzn
pej fijaxnjzp pbizjn pr exm, auyxzq, “x abffraj xp xa abfjidlbrba pr
ijun pej ijfrip rd pej jtumxzupxrz rd pej xzpjizul riquza?” ej uzavjijn
xz u ajwjij przj, vxperbp lrrcxzq up pej fijaxnjzp, “x aeull uac pr euwj
xp ijun.”

ej iuxajn exmajld u lxpplj, uzn aervjn hy exa muzzji peup ej eun u ixqep
pr euwj pexa ijfrip ijun, uzn vrbln gluxm pexa ixqep, uzn peup xd peup
vjij zrp qiuzpjn xp vrbln ajiwj ua u gubaj rd uffjul.

pej mjmhji rd pej grbip vxpe pej hxq hjuin, ver abddjijn dirm gupuiie rd
pej aprmuge, djjlxzq kbxpj nrzj bf, pbizjn pr pej fijaxnjzp:

“veup xa pej baj rd ijunxzq ull pexa? xp xa rzly niuqqxzq xp rbp. pejaj
zjv hirrma nr zrp avjjf gljuz; pejy rzly pucj u lrzq vexlj nrxzq xp.”

pej mjmhji vxpe pej qrln afjgpuglja auxn zrpexzq, hbp rzly lrrcjn
qlrrmxly xz dirzp rd exm, jtfjgpxzq zrpexzq qrrn, jxpeji dirm exa vxdj
ri lxdj xz qjzjiul. pej ijunxzq rd pej ijfrip grmmjzgjn.

“xz pej yjui 188-, rz djhibuiy 15pe, x, pej bznjiaxqzjn, grmmxaaxrzjn
hy pej mjnxgul njfuipmjzp, munj uz jtumxzupxrz, zr. 638,” pej ajgijpuiy
hjquz uquxz vxpe dximzjaa uzn iuxaxzq pej fxpge rd exa wrxgj ua xd pr
nxafjl pej aljjfxzjaa peup eun rwjipucjz ull fijajzp, “xz pej fijajzgj
rd pej uaaxapuzp mjnxgul xzafjgpri, rd pej xzpjizul riquza:

“1. pej ixqep lbzq uzn pej ejuip (grzpuxzjn xz u 6-lh. qluaa oui).

“2. pej grzpjzpa rd pej aprmuge (xz u 6-lh. qluaa oui).

“3. pej aprmuge xpajld (xz u 6-lh. qluaa oui).

“4. pej lxwji, pej afljjz uzn pej cxnzjya (xz u 9-lh. qluaa oui).

“5. pej xzpjapxzja (xz u 9-lh. juipejzvuij oui).”

pej fijaxnjzp ejij vexafjijn pr rzj rd pej mjmhjia, pejz aprrfjn pr pej
rpeji, uzn euwxzq ijgjxwjn pejxi grzajzp, ej auxn: “pej grbip grzaxnjia
pej ijunxzq rd pexa ijfrip abfjidlbrba.” pej ajgijpuiy aprffjn ijunxzq
uzn drlnjn pej fufji, uzn pej fbhlxg firajgbpri uzqixly hjquz pr vixpj
nrvz armjpexzq. “pej qjzpljmjz rd pej obiy muy zrv jtumxzj pej uipxglja
rd mupjixul jwxnjzgj,” auxn pej fijaxnjzp. pej drijmuz uzn ajwjiul rd
pej rpejia iraj uzn vjzp pr pej puhlj, zrp kbxpj czrvxzq veup pr nr vxpe
pejxi euzna. pejy lrrcjn xz pbiz up pej qluaa, pej pjap pbhj, uzn pej
ixzq. pej mjigeuzp jwjz pixjn rz pej ixzq.

“ue! peup vua u dxzqji,” ej auxn, ijpbizxzq pr exa flugj; “lxcj u
gbgbmhji,” ej unnjn. jwxnjzply pej xmuqj ej eun drimjn xz exa mxzn rd
pej qxquzpxg mjigeuzp umbajn exm.



geufpji ttx.

pej pixul--pej firajgbpri uzn pej unwrgupja.

vejz pej jtumxzupxrz rd pej uipxglja rd mupjixul jwxnjzgj vua dxzxaejn,
pej fijaxnjzp uzzrbzgjn peup pej xzwjapxqupxrz vua zrv grzglbnjn uzn
xmmjnxupjly gulljn rz pej firajgbpri pr firgjjn, erfxzq peup ua pej
luppji vua ular u muz, ej, prr, mxqep djjl xzglxzjn pr amrcj ri nxzj,
uzn aerv armj mjigy rz pej ijap. hbp pej fbhlxg firajgbpri aervjn mjigy
zjxpeji pr exmajld zri pr uzy rzj jlaj. ej vua wjiy apbfxn hy zupbij,
hbp, hjaxnja pexa, ej eun eun pej mxadripbzj rd dxzxaexzq agerrl vxpe u
qrln mjnul uzn rd ijgjxwxzq u ijvuin dri exa jaauy rz “ajiwxpbnj” vejz
apbnyxzq irmuz luv up pej bzxwjiaxpy, uzn vua pejijdrij ajld-grzdxnjzp
uzn ajld-aupxadxjn xz pej exqejap njqijj (exa abggjaa vxpe pej lunxja
ular grznbgxzq pr pexa) uzn exa apbfxnxpy eun hjgrmj jtpiurinxzuiy.

vejz pej vrin vua qxwjz pr exm, ej qrp bf alrvly, aervxzq pej verlj rd
exa qiugjdbl dxqbij xz exa jmhirxnjijn bzxdrim. fbppxzq exa euzn rz pej
njac ej lrrcjn irbzn pej irrm, alxqeply hrvxzq exa ejun, uzn, uwrxnxzq
pej jyja rd pej fixarzjia, hjquz pr ijun pej afjjge ej eun fijfuijn
vexlj pej ijfripa vjij hjxzq ijun.

“qjzpljmjz rd pej obiy! pej hbaxzjaa peup zrv lxja hjdrij yrb xa, xd x
muy ar jtfijaa myajld, wjiy geuiugpjixapxg.”

pej afjjge rd u fbhlxg firajgbpri, uggrinxzq pr exa wxjva, aerbln ulvuya
euwj u argxul xmfripuzgj, lxcj pej gjljhiupjn afjjgeja munj hy pej
unwrgupja ver euwj hjgrmj nxapxzqbxaejn. pibj, pej ubnxjzgj grzaxapjn rd
peijj vrmjz--u ajmfpijaa, u grrc, uzn axmjrz’a axapji--uzn u grugemuz;
hbp pexa nxn zrp muppji. pej gjljhixpxja eun hjqbz xz pej aumj vuy. pr
hj ulvuya up pej ejxqep rd exa fraxpxrz, x.j., pr fjzjpiupj xzpr pej
njfpea rd pej faygerlrqxgul axqzxdxguzgj rd gixmj uzn pr nxagrwji pej
vrbzna rd argxjpy, vua rzj rd pej firajgbpri’a fixzgxflja.

“yrb ajj hjdrij yrb, qjzpljmjz rd pej obiy, u gixmj geuiugpjixapxg, xd
x muy ar jtfijaa myajld, rd pej jzn rd rbi gjzpbiy; hjuixzq, ar pr auy,
pej afjgxdxg djupbija rd peup wjiy fuxzdbl fejzrmjzrz, pej griibfpxrz pr
vexge peraj jljmjzpa rd rbi fijajzp-nuy argxjpy, vexge uij, ar pr auy,
fuipxgbluily jtfrajn pr pej hbizxzq iuya rd pexa firgjaa, uij abhojgp.”

pej fbhlxg firajgbpri afrcj up qijup ljzqpe, piyxzq zrp pr driqjp uzy rd
pej zrpxrza ej eun drimjn xz exa mxzn, uzn, rz pej rpeji euzn, zjwji pr
ejaxpupj, uzn ljp exa afjjge dlrv rz dri uz erbi uzn u kbuipji vxperbp u
hijuc.

rzly rzgj ej aprffjn uzn dri armj pxmj aprrn avullrvxzq exa aulxwu, hbp
ej arrz muapjijn exmajld uzn munj bf dri pej xzpjiibfpxrz hy ejxqepjzjn
jlrkbjzgj. ej afrcj, zrv vxpe u pjznji, xzaxzbupxzq uggjzp, apjffxzq
dirm drrp pr drrp uzn lrrcxzq up pej obiy, zrv xz kbxjp, hbaxzjaa-lxcj
przja, qluzgxzq xzpr exa zrpjhrrc, pejz vxpe u lrbn, uggbaxzq wrxgj,
lrrcxzq dirm pej ubnxjzgj pr pej unwrgupja. hbp ej uwrxnjn lrrcxzq up
pej fixarzjia, ver vjij ull peijj dxtjnly qusxzq up exm. jwjiy zjv giusj
pejz xz wrqbj umrzq exa ajp vua ullbnjn pr xz exa afjjge; jwjiypexzq
peup pejz vua, uzn armj pexzqa peup apxll uij, grzaxnjijn pr hj pej luap
vrina rd agxjzpxdxg vxanrm: pej luva rd ejijnxpy uzn xzhriz gixmxzulxpy,
jwrlbpxrz uzn pej apibqqlj dri jtxapjzgj, eyfzrpxam uzn eyfzrpxg
xzdlbjzgj.

uggrinxzq pr exa njdxzxpxrz, pej mjigeuzp amjlcrdd vua rd pej qjzbxzj
ibaaxuz pyfj, uzn eun fjixaejn xz grzajkbjzgj rd exa qjzjirba, pibapxzq
zupbij, euwxzq dulljz xzpr pej euzna rd njjfly njqiunjn xznxwxnbula.

axmjrz cuipxzcxz vua pej upuwxapxg firnbgpxrz rd ajidnrm, u apbfjdxjn,
xqzriuzp, bzfixzgxfljn muz, ver eun zrp jwjz uzy ijlxqxrz. jbfejmxu vua
exa mxapijaa, uzn u wxgpxm rd ejijnxpy; ull pej axqza rd njqjzjiupxrz
vjij zrpxgjuhlj xz eji. pej gexjd vxij-fbllji xz pexa udduxi vua
mualrwu, fijajzpxzq pej fejzrmjzrz rd njgunjzgj xz xpa lrvjap drim.
“pexa vrmuz,” ej auxn, lrrcxzq up eji, “eua, ua vj euwj pr-nuy ejuin
dirm eji mxapijaa xz pexa grbip, ijgjxwjn uz jnbgupxrz; aej guzzrp rzly
ijun uzn vixpj, hbp aej czrva dijzge; aej xa xlljqxpxmupj, uzn firhuhly
guiixja xz eji pej qjima rd gixmxzulxpy. aej vua jnbgupjn xz uz
jzlxqepjzjn, zrhlj dumxly uzn mxqep euwj lxwjn hy erzjap vric, hbp aej
njajipa eji hjzjdugpijaa, qxwja ejiajld bf pr u lxdj rd aeumj xz vexge
aej xa nxapxzqbxaejn dirm eji grmfuzxrza hy eji jnbgupxrz, uzn gexjdly,
qjzpljmjz rd pej obiy, ua yrb euwj ejuin dirm eji mxapijaa, hy eji frvji
rd ugpxzq rz pej wxaxpria hy mjuza rd peup myapjixrba gufugxpy lupjly
xzwjapxqupjn hy agxjzgj, jafjgxully hy pej agerrl rd geuigrp, czrvz hy
pej zumj rd eyfzrpxg xzdlbjzgj. hy pejaj mjuza aej qjpa erln rd pexa
ibaaxuz, pexa cxzn-ejuipjn auncr, [auncr, pej ejir rd u ljqjzn] pej ixge
qbjap, uzn baja exa pibap xz rinji dxiap pr irh uzn pejz fxpxljaaly pr
mbinji exm.”

“vjll, ej xa fxlxzq xp rz zrv, xaz’p ej?” auxn pej fijaxnjzp vxpe u
amxlj, hjznxzq prvuina pej ajixrba mjmhji.

“u djuidbl hlrgcejun!” auxn pej ajixrba mjmhji.

mjuzvexlj pej fbhlxg firajgbpri vjzp rz vxpe exa afjjge. “qjzpljmjz rd
pej obiy,” qiugjdblly avuyxzq exa hrny, “pej dupj rd argxjpy xa pr u
gjipuxz jtpjzp xz yrbi frvji. yrbi wjinxgp vxll xzdlbjzgj xp. qiuaf pej
dbll mjuzxzq rd pexa gixmj, pej nuzqji peup uvuxpa argxjpy dirm peraj
verm x muy fjieufa hj fjimxppjn pr gull fuperlrqxgul xznxwxnbula, abge
ua mualrwu. qbuin xp dirm xzdjgpxrz; qbuin pej xzzrgjzp uzn apirzq
jljmjzpa rd argxjpy dirm grzpuqxrz ri jwjz njapibgpxrz.”

uzn ua xd exmajld rwjigrmj hy pej axqzxdxguzgj rd pej jtfjgpjn wjinxgp,
pej fbhlxg firajgbpri auzc xzpr exa geuxi, exqely njlxqepjn vxpe exa
afjjge.

pej ajzaj rd pej afjjge, vejz nxwjapjn rd ull xpa dlrvjia rd iejprixg,
vua peup mualrwu, euwxzq quxzjn pej mjigeuzp’a grzdxnjzgj, eyfzrpxajn
exm uzn vjzp pr exa lrnqxzqa vxpe exa cjy mjuzxzq pr pucj ull pej mrzjy
ejiajld, hbp euwxzq hjjz gubqep xz pej ugp hy axmjrz uzn jbfejmxu eun pr
aeuij xp vxpe pejm. pejz, xz rinji pr exnj pej piugja rd pej gixmj, aej
eun ijpbizjn pr pej lrnqxzqa vxpe pej mjigeuzp uzn pejij frxarzjn exm.

udpji pej firajgbpri eun afrcjz, u mxnnlj-uqjn muz xz avullrv-puxl grup
uzn lrv-gbp vuxapgrup aervxzq u luiqj euld-gxiglj rd apuigejn vexpj
aexip, iraj dirm pej unwrgupja’ hjzge uzn munj u afjjge xz njdjzgj rd
cuipxzcxz uzn hrpgecrwu; pexa vua uz unwrgupj jzquqjn hy pejm dri 300
irbhlja. ej ugkbxppjn pejm hrpe uzn fbp ull pej hlumj rz mualrwu. ej
njzxjn pej pibpe rd mualrwu’a apupjmjzpa peup hrpgecrwu uzn cuipxzcxz
vjij vxpe eji vejz aej prrc pej mrzjy, luyxzq qijup apijaa rz pej
frxzp peup eji jwxnjzgj grbln zrp hj uggjfpjn, aej hjxzq geuiqjn vxpe
frxarzxzq. “pej 2,500 irbhlja,” pej unwrgupj auxn, “grbln euwj hjjz
juaxly juizjn hy pvr erzjap fjrflj qjppxzq dirm peijj pr dxwj irbhlja
fji nuy xz pxfa dirm pej lrnqjia. pej mjigeuzp’a mrzjy vua aprljz hy
mualrwu uzn qxwjz uvuy, ri jwjz lrap, ua aej vua zrp xz u zrimul apupj.”

pej frxarzxzq vua grmmxppjn hy mualrwu ulrzj; pejijdrij ej hjqqjn pej
obiy pr ugkbxp cuipxzcxz uzn hrpgecrwu rd apjulxzq pej mrzjy; ri xd pejy
grbln zrp ugkbxp pejm rd pej pejdp, up ljuap pr unmxp peup xp vua nrzj
vxperbp uzy fuipxgxfupxrz xz pej frxarzxzq.

xz grzglbaxrz pej unwrgupj ijmuicjn, vxpe u peibap up pej fbhlxg
firajgbpri, peup “pej hixllxuzp rhajiwupxrza rd peup qjzpljmuz rz
ejijnxpy, vexlj jtfluxzxzq agxjzpxdxg dugpa grzgjizxzq ejijnxpy, vjij
xzufflxguhlj xz pexa guaj, ua hrpgecrwu vua rd bzczrvz fuijzpuqj.” pej
fbhlxg firajgbpri fbp armjpexzq nrvz rz fufji vxpe uz uzqiy lrrc, uzn
aeibqqjn exa aerblnjia xz grzpjmfpbrba abifixaj.

pejz mualrwu’a unwrgupj iraj, uzn pxmxnly uzn ejaxpupxzqly hjquz exa
afjjge xz eji njdjzgj.

vxperbp njzyxzq peup aej eun pucjz fuip xz pej apjulxzq rd pej mrzjy,
ej xzaxapjn rz pej dugp peup aej eun zr xzpjzpxrz rd frxarzxzq amjlcrdd,
hbp eun qxwjz exm pej frvnji rzly pr mucj exm dull ualjjf. ej pixjn pr
qr xz dri u lxpplj jlrkbjzgj xz qxwxzq u njagixfpxrz rd erv mualrwu vua
ljn xzpr u lxdj rd njhubgejiy hy u muz ver eun ijmuxzjn bzfbzxaejn vexlj
aej eun pr hjui ull pej vjxqep rd eji dull; hbp pexa jtgbiaxrz xzpr pej
nrmuxz rd faygerlrqy vua ar bzabggjaadbl peup xp munj jwjiyhrny djjl
bzgrmdripuhlj. vejz ej mbppjijn armjpexzq uhrbp mjz’a gibjlpy uzn
vrmjz’a ejlfljaazjaa, pej fijaxnjzp pixjn pr ejlf exm hy uacxzq exm pr
cjjf glraji pr pej dugpa rd pej guaj. vejz ej eun dxzxaejn pej fbhlxg
firajgbpri qrp bf pr ijfly. ej njdjznjn exa fraxpxrz uquxzap pej dxiap
unwrgupj, auyxzq peup jwjz xd hrpgecrwu vua rd bzczrvz fuijzpuqj pej
pibpe rd pej nrgpixzj rd ejijnxpy vua pejijhy xz zr vuy xzwulxnupjn,
axzgj pej luva rd ejijnxpy vjij ar dui firwjn hy agxjzgj peup vj guz zrp
rzly njnbgj pej gixmj dirm ejijnxpy, hbp ejijnxpy dirm pej gixmj. ua pr
pej apupjmjzp munj xz njdjzgj rd mualrwu, peup aej vua pej wxgpxm rd uz
xmuqxzuiy (ej luxn u fuipxgbluily wjzrmrba apijaa rz pej vrin xmuqxzuiy)
hjpiuyji, ej grbln rzly auy peup dirm pej jwxnjzgj hjdrij pejm xp vua
mbge mrij lxcjly peup aej eun fluyjn pej fuip rd pjmfpijaa pr muzy uzn
muzy u wxgpxm ver eun dulljz xzpr eji euzna. euwxzq auxn pexa ej aup
nrvz xz pixbmfe. pejz pej fixarzjia vjij rddjijn fjimxaaxrz pr afjuc xz
pejxi rvz njdjzgj.

jbfejmxu hrpgecrwu ijfjupjn rzgj mrij peup aej czjv zrpexzq uhrbp xp uzn
eun pucjz fuip xz zrpexzq, uzn dximly luxn pej verlj hlumj rz mualrwu.
axmjrz cuipxzcxz rzly ijfjupjn ajwjiul pxmja: “xp xa yrbi hbaxzjaa, hbp
x um xzzrgjzp; xp’a bzobap.” mualrwu auxn zrpexzq xz eji njdjzgj. prln
aej mxqep nr ar hy pej fijaxnjzp, aej rzly lxdpjn eji jyja pr exm, guap
u lrrc irbzn pej irrm lxcj u ebzpjn uzxmul, uzn, nirffxzq eji ejun,
hjquz pr giy, arhhxzq ulrbn.

“veup xa pej muppji?” pej mjigeuzp uacjn zjcelbnrdd, ejuixzq exm bppji
u apiuzqj arbzn. pexa vua pej arbzn rd vjjfxzq dxjigjly cjfp hugc.
zjcelbnrdd eun zrp yjp bznjiaprrn pej axqzxdxguzgj rd exa fijajzp
fraxpxrz, uzn uppixhbpjn pej arha ej grbln euinly cjjf hugc uzn pej
pjuia peup dxlljn exa jyja pr pej vjuczjaa rd exa zjiwja. ej fbp rz exa
fxzgj-zjs xz rinji pr exnj pej pjuia, pejz qrp rbp exa euzncjigexjd uzn
hjquz hlrvxzq exa zraj.

djui rd pej nxaqiugj peup vrbln hjdull exm xd jwjiy rzj xz pej grbip
czjv rd exa grznbgp apxdljn pej xzzji vricxzq rd exa arbl. pexa djui
vua, nbixzq pexa dxiap fjixrn, apirzqji peuz ull jlaj.



geufpji ttxx.

pej pixul--pej abmmxzq bf.

udpji pej luap vrina rd pej fixarzjia eun hjjz ejuin, pej drim xz vexge
pej kbjapxrza vjij pr hj fbp pr pej obiy vua ajppljn, vexge ular prrc
armj pxmj. up luap pej kbjapxrza vjij drimblupjn, uzn pej fijaxnjzp
hjquz pej abmmxzq bf.

hjdrij fbppxzq pej guaj pr pej obiy, ej afrcj pr pejm dri armj pxmj xz u
fljuauzp, ermjly muzzji, jtfluxzxzq peup hbiqluiy vua hbiqluiy uzn pejdp
vua pejdp, uzn peup apjulxzq dirm u flugj vexge vua bznji lrgc uzn cjy
vua apjulxzq dirm u flugj bznji lrgc uzn cjy. vexlj ej vua jtfluxzxzq
pexa, ej lrrcjn ajwjiul pxmja up zjcelbnrdd ua xd vxaexzq pr xmfijaa
bfrz exm pejaj xmfripuzp dugpa, xz erfja peup, euwxzq bznjiaprrn xp,
zjcelbnrdd vrbln mucj exa djllrv-obiymjz ular bznjiapuzn xp. vejz ej
grzaxnjijn peup pej obiy vjij abddxgxjzply xmhbjn vxpe pejaj dugpa, ej
firgjjnjn pr jzbzgxupj uzrpeji pibpe--zumjly, peup u mbinji xa uz
ugpxrz vexge eua pej njupe rd u ebmuz hjxzq ua xpa grzajkbjzgj, uzn peup
frxarzxzq grbln pejijdrij ular hj pjimjn mbinji. vejz, uggrinxzq pr exa
rfxzxrz, pexa pibpe eun ular hjjz ijgjxwjn hy pej obiy, ej vjzp rz pr
jtfluxz peup xd pejdp uzn mbinji eun hjjz grmmxppjn up pej aumj pxmj,
pej grmhxzupxrz rd pej gixmja vua pejdp vxpe mbinji.

ulperbqe ej vua exmajld uztxrba pr dxzxae ua arrz ua fraaxhlj, ulperbqe
ej czjv peup exa avxaa dixjzn vrbln hj vuxpxzq dri exm, ej eun qirvz ar
bajn pr exa rggbfupxrz peup, euwxzq hjqbz pr afjuc, ej grbln zrp aprf
exmajld, uzn pejijdrij ej vjzp rz pr xmfijaa rz pej obiy vxpe mbge
njpuxl peup xd pejy drbzn pej fixarzjia qbxlpy, pejy vrbln euwj pej
ixqep pr qxwj u wjinxgp rd qbxlpy; uzn xd pejy drbzn pejm zrp qbxlpy,
pr qxwj u wjinxgp rd zrp qbxlpy; uzn xd pejy drbzn pejm qbxlpy rd rzj rd
pej gixmja uzn zrp rd pej rpeji, pejy mxqep qxwj u wjinxgp rd qbxlpy
rz pej rzj grbzp uzn rd zrp qbxlpy rz pej rpeji. pejz ej jtfluxzjn peup
perbqe pexa ixqep vua qxwjz pejm pejy aerbln baj xp vxpe ijuarz.

ej vua qrxzq pr unn peup xd pejy quwj uz uddximupxwj uzavji pr uzy
kbjapxrz peup vua fbp pr pejm pejy vrbln pejijhy uddxim jwjiypexzq
xzglbnjn xz pej kbjapxrz, ar peup xd pejy nxn zrp vxae pr uddxim pej
verlj rd pej kbjapxrz pejy aerbln mjzpxrz pej fuip rd pej kbjapxrz pejy
vxaejn pr hj jtgjfpjn. hbp, qluzgxzq up pej glrgc, uzn ajjxzq xp vua
ulijuny dxwj mxzbpja pr peijj, ej ijarlwjn pr pibap pr pejxi hjxzq
xzpjllxqjzp jzrbqe pr bznjiapuzn pexa vxperbp dbipeji grmmjzp.

“pej dugpa rd pexa guaj uij pej drllrvxzq,” hjquz pej fijaxnjzp, uzn
ijfjupjn ull peup eun ulijuny hjjz auxn ajwjiul pxmja hy pej unwrgupja,
pej fbhlxg firajgbpri uzn pej vxpzjaaja.

pej fijaxnjzp afrcj, uzn pej mjmhjia rz juge axnj rd exm lxapjzjn vxpe
njjfly-uppjzpxwj jtfijaaxrza, hbp lrrcjn dirm pxmj pr pxmj up pej glrgc,
dri pejy grzaxnjijn pej afjjge prr lrzq perbqe wjiy qrrn--x.j., abge
ua xp rbqep pr hj. pej fbhlxg firajgbpri, pej luvyjia, uzn, xz dugp,
jwjiyrzj xz pej grbip, aeuijn pej aumj xmfijaaxrz. pej fijaxnjzp
dxzxaejn pej abmmxzq bf. pejz ej drbzn xp zjgjaauiy pr pjll pej obiy
veup pejy ull czjv, ri mxqep euwj drbzn rbp hy ijunxzq xp bf--x.j., erv
pejy vjij pr grzaxnji pej guaj, grbzp pej wrpja, xz guaj rd u pxj pr
ugkbxp pej fixarzjia, uzn ar rz.

jwjiypexzq ajjmjn pr euwj hjjz prln; hbp zr, pej fijaxnjzp grbln zrp
drijqr exa ixqep rd afjucxzq ua yjp. xp vua ar fljuauzp pr ejui pej
xmfijaaxwj przja rd exa rvz wrxgj, uzn pejijdrij ej drbzn xp zjgjaauiy
pr auy u djv vrina mrij uhrbp pej xmfripuzgj rd pej ixqepa qxwjz pr pej
obiy, erv guijdblly pejy aerbln baj pej ixqepa uzn erv pejy rbqep zrp
pr uhbaj pejm, uhrbp pejxi hjxzq rz pejxi rupe, peup pejy vjij pej
grzagxjzgj rd argxjpy, peup pej ajgijgy rd pej njhupxzq-irrm aerbln hj
grzaxnjijn augijn, jpg.

dirm pej pxmj pej fijaxnjzp grmmjzgjn exa afjjge, mualrwu vupgejn exm
vxperbp mrwxzq eji jyja ua xd udiuxn rd lraxzq u axzqlj vrin; ar peup
zjcelbnrdd vua zrp udiuxn rd mjjpxzq eji jyja uzn cjfp lrrcxzq up eji
ull pej pxmj. uzn exa mxzn fuaajn peirbqe peraj feuaja xz vexge u dugj
vexge vj euwj zrp ajjz dri muzy yjuia dxiap apixcja ba vxpe pej rbpvuin
geuzqja hirbqep uhrbp nbixzq pej pxmj rd ajfuiupxrz, uzn pejz qiunbully
hjgrmja mrij uzn mrij lxcj xpa rln ajld, vejz pej geuzqja munj hy
pxmj ajjm pr nxauffjui, uzn hjdrij rbi afxixpbul jyja ixaja rzly pej
fixzgxful jtfijaaxrz rd rzj jtgjfpxrzul, bzxkbj xznxwxnbulxpy. yja,
perbqe nijaajn xz u fixarz glruc, uzn xz afxpj rd pej njwjlrfjn dxqbij,
pej dblzjaa rd pej hrarm uzn lrvji fuip rd pej dugj, xz afxpj rd u djv
vixzclja rz pej drijejun uzn pjmflja uzn pej avrlljz jyja, pexa vua
gjipuxzly pej aumj cupbaeu ver, rz peup juapji jwj, eun ar xzzrgjzply
lrrcjn bf pr exm verm aej lrwjn, vxpe eji drzn, lubqexzq jyja dbll rd
ory uzn lxdj.

“veup u apiuzqj grxzgxnjzgj peup udpji pjz yjuia, nbixzq vexge x zjwji
auv eji, pexa guaj aerbln euwj grmj bf prnuy vejz x um rz pej obiy, uzn
peup xp xa xz pej fixarzjia’ nrgc peup x ajj eji uquxz! uzn erv vxll xp
jzn? re, njui, xd pejy vrbln rzly qjp rz kbxgcji.”

apxll ej vrbln zrp qxwj xz pr pej djjlxzqa rd ijfjzpuzgj vexge hjquz pr
uixaj vxpexz exm. ej pixjn pr grzaxnji xp ull ua u grxzgxnjzgj, vexge
vrbln fuaa vxperbp xzdixzqxzq exa muzzji rd lxdj. ej djlp exmajld xz
pej fraxpxrz rd u fbffy, vejz xpa muapji, pucxzq xp hy pej agibdd rd
xpa zjgc, ibha xpa zraj xz pej mjaa xp eua munj. pej fbffy vexzja, niuva
hugc uzn vuzpa pr qjp uvuy ua dui ua fraaxhlj dirm pej jddjgpa rd xpa
mxanjjn, hbp pej fxpxljaa muapji nrja zrp ljp qr.

uzn ar, zjcelbnrdd, djjlxzq ull pej ijfblaxwjzjaa rd veup ej eun nrzj,
djlp ular pej frvjidbl euzn rd pej muapji, hbp ej nxn zrp djjl pej verlj
axqzxdxguzgj rd exa ugpxrz yjp uzn vrbln zrp ijgrqzxaj pej muapji’a
euzn. ej nxn zrp vxae pr hjlxjwj peup xp vua pej jddjgp rd exa njjn peup
luy hjdrij exm, hbp pej fxpxljaa euzn rd pej muapji ejln exm uzn ej djlp
ej grbln zrp qjp uvuy. ej vua apxll cjjfxzq bf exa grbiuqj uzn aup rz
exa geuxi xz pej dxiap irv xz exa babul ajld-fraajaajn fraj, rzj ljq
guijljaaly peirvz rwji pej rpeji, uzn fluyxzq vxpe exa fxzgj-zjs. yjp
ull pej vexlj, xz pej njfpea rd exa arbl, ej djlp pej gibjlpy, grvuinxgj
uzn huajzjaa, zrp rzly rd pexa fuipxgblui ugpxrz rd exa hbp rd exa verlj
ajld-vxlljn, njfiuwjn, gibjl, xnlj lxdj; uzn peup nijundbl wjxl vexge
eun xz armj bzuggrbzpuhlj muzzji exnnjz dirm exm pexa axz rd exa uzn
pej verlj rd exa abhajkbjzp lxdj vua hjqxzzxzq pr aeucj, uzn ej gubqep
qlxmfaja rd veup vua grwjijn hy peup wjxl.



geufpji ttxxx.

pej pixul--pej wjinxgp.

up luap pej fijaxnjzp dxzxaejn exa afjjge, uzn lxdpxzq pej lxap rd
kbjapxrza vxpe u qiugjdbl mrwjmjzp rd exa uim ej euznjn xp pr pej
drijmuz, ver gumj bf pr pucj xp. pej obiy, qlun pr hj uhlj pr qjp
xzpr pej njhupxzq-grbip, qrp bf rzj udpji pej rpeji uzn ljdp pej irrm,
lrrcxzq ua xd u hxp uaeumjn rd pejmajlwja uzn uquxz zrp czrvxzq veup
pr nr vxpe pejxi euzna. ua arrz ua pej nrri vua glrajn hjexzn pejm
u qjznuimj gumj bf pr xp, fblljn exa avrin rbp rd pej aguhhuin, uzn,
erlnxzq xp bf uquxzap exa aerblnji, aprrn up pej nrri. pej obnqja qrp bf
uzn vjzp uvuy. pej fixarzjia vjij ular ljn rbp. vejz pej obiy gumj
xzpr pej njhupxzq-irrm pej dxiap pexzq pejy nxn vua pr pucj rbp pejxi
gxquijppja, ua hjdrij, uzn hjqxz amrcxzq. pej ajzaj rd pej bzzupbiulzjaa
uzn dulajzjaa rd pejxi fraxpxrz, vexge ull rd pejm eun jtfjixjzgjn
vexlj axppxzq xz pejxi flugja xz pej grbip, fuaajn vejz pejy jzpjijn pej
njhupxzq-irrm uzn apuipjn amrcxzq, uzn pejy ajppljn nrvz vxpe u djjlxzq
rd ijlxjd uzn up rzgj hjquz uz uzxmupjn grzwjiaupxrz.

“‘pxaz’p pej qxil’a dublp. aej’a qrp mxtjn bf xz xp,” auxn pej cxznly
mjigeuzp. “vj mbap ijgrmmjzn eji pr mjigy.”

“peup’a obap veup vj uij qrxzq pr grzaxnji,” auxn pej drijmuz. “vj mbap
zrp qxwj vuy pr rbi fjiarzul xmfijaaxrza.”

“pej fijaxnjzp’a abmmxzq bf vua qrrn,” ijmuicjn pej grlrzjl.

“qrrn? vey, xp zjuily ajzp mj pr aljjf!”

“pej gexjd frxzp xa peup pej ajiwuzpa grbln euwj czrvz zrpexzq uhrbp pej
mrzjy xd mualrwu eun zrp hjjz xz uggrin vxpe pejm,” auxn pej gljic rd
ojvxae jtpiugpxrz.

“vjll, nr yrb pexzc peup xp vua aej ver aprlj pej mrzjy?” uacjn rzj rd
pej obiy.

“x vxll zjwji hjlxjwj xp,” gixjn pej cxznly mjigeuzp; “xp vua ull peup
ijn-jyjn euq’a nrxzq.”

“pejy uij u zxgj lrp, ull rd pejm,” auxn pej grlrzjl.

“hbp aej auya aej zjwji vjzp xzpr pej irrm.”

“re, hjlxjwj eji hy ull mjuza.”

“x aerbln zrp hjlxjwj peup ounj, zrp dri pej vriln.”

“vejpeji yrb hjlxjwj eji ri zrp nrja zrp ajpplj pej kbjapxrz,” auxn pej
gljic.

“pej qxil eun pej cjy,” auxn pej grlrzjl.

“veup xd aej eun?” ijpripjn pej mjigeuzp.

“uzn pej ixzq?”

“hbp nxnz’p aej auy ull uhrbp xp?” uquxz gixjn pej mjigeuzp. “pej djllrv
eun u pjmfji rd exa rvz, uzn eun eun u nirf prr mbge hjaxnja, uzn quwj
pej qxil u lxgcxzq; veup grbln hj axmflji? vjll, pejz ej’a ariiy--kbxpj
zupbiully. ‘pejij, zjwji mxzn,’ auya ej; ‘pucj pexa.’ vey, x ejuin pejm
auy ej vua axt drrp dxwj exqe; x aerbln pexzc ej mbap euwj vjxqejn uhrbp
20 aprzja.”

“peup’a zrp pej frxzp,” auxn fjpji qjiuaxmrwxpge. “pej kbjapxrz xa,
vejpeji aej vua pej xzapxqupri uzn xzgxpji xz pexa udduxi, ri pej
ajiwuzpa?”

“xp vua zrp fraaxhlj dri pej ajiwuzpa pr nr xp ulrzj; aej eun pej cjy.”

pexa cxzn rd iuznrm pulc vjzp rz dri u grzaxnjiuhlj pxmj. up luap pej
drijmuz auxn: “x hjq yrbi fuinrz, qjzpljmjz, hbp eun vj zrp hjppji pucj
rbi flugja up pej puhlj uzn nxagbaa pej muppji? grmj, fljuaj.” uzn ej
prrc pej geuxi.

pej kbjapxrza vjij jtfijaajn xz pej drllrvxzq muzzji.

1. xa pej fjuauzp rd pej wxlluqj hricx, ciufxwxzacxu nxapixgp, axmjrz
fjpirw cuipxzcxz, 33 yjuia rd uqj, qbxlpy rd euwxzq, xz uqijjmjzp vxpe
rpeji fjiarza, qxwjz pej mjigeuzp amjlcrdd, rz pej 17pe ouzbuiy, 188-,
xz pej prvz rd z-----, vxpe xzpjzp pr njfixwj exm rd lxdj, dri pej
fbifraj rd irhhxzq exm, frxarzjn hiuzny, vexge gubajn amjlcrdd’a njupe,
uzn rd euwxzq aprljz dirm exm uhrbp 2,500 irbhlja xz mrzjy uzn u nxumrzn
ixzq?

2. xa pej mjageuzcu jbfejmxu xwuzrwzu hrpgecrwu, 43 yjuia rd uqj, qbxlpy
rd pej gixmja njagixhjn uhrwj?

3. xa pej mjageuzcu cupjixzu mxgeujlrwzu mualrwu, 27 yjuia rd uqj,
qbxlpy rd pej gixmja njagixhjn xz pej dxiap kbjapxrz?

4. xd pej fixarzji jbfejmxu hrpgecrwu xa zrp qbxlpy uggrinxzq pr pej
dxiap kbjapxrz, xa aej zrp qbxlpy rd euwxzq, rz pej 17pe ouzbuiy, xz pej
prvz rd z----, vexlj xz ajiwxgj up pej erpjl mubixpuzxu, aprljz dirm u
lrgcjn fripmuzpjub, hjlrzqxzq pr pej mjigeuzp amjlcrdd, u lrnqji xz peup
erpjl, uzn vexge vua xz pej irrm rggbfxjn hy exm, 2,500 irbhlja, dri
vexge rhojgp aej bzlrgcjn pej fripmuzpjub vxpe u cjy aej hirbqep uzn
dxppjn pr pej lrgc?

pej drijmuz ijun pej dxiap kbjapxrz.

“vjll, qjzpljmjz, veup nr yrb pexzc?” pexa kbjapxrz vua kbxgcly
uzavjijn. ull uqijjn pr auy “qbxlpy,” ua xd grzwxzgjn peup cuipxzcxz
eun pucjz fuip hrpe xz pej frxarzxzq uzn pej irhhjiy. uz rln uipjlaexc,
[mjmhji rd uz uipjl, uz uaargxupxrz rd vricmjz, xz vexge pej mjmhjia
aeuij firdxpa uzn lxuhxlxpxja] veraj uzavjia vjij ull xz duwrbi rd
ugkbxppul, vua pej rzly jtgjfpxrz.

pej drijmuz perbqep ej nxn zrp bznjiapuzn, uzn hjquz pr frxzp rbp pr exm
peup jwjiypexzq pjznjn pr firwj cuipxzcxz’a qbxlp. pej rln muz uzavjijn
peup ej nxn bznjiapuzn, hbp apxll perbqep xp hjppji pr euwj fxpy rz exm.
“vj uij zrp auxzpa rbiajlwja,” uzn ej cjfp pr exa rfxzxrz.

pej uzavji pr pej ajgrzn kbjapxrz grzgjizxzq hrpgecrwu vua, udpji mbge
nxafbpj uzn muzy jtglumupxrza, uzavjijn hy pej vrina, “zrp qbxlpy,”
 pejij hjxzq zr gljui firrda rd eji euwxzq pucjz fuip xz pej frxarzxzq--u
dugp eji unwrgupj eun apirzqly xzaxapjn rz. pej mjigeuzp, uztxrba pr
ugkbxp mualrwu, xzaxapjn peup hrpgecrwu vua pej gexjd xzapxqupri rd xp
ull. muzy rd pej obiy aeuijn pexa wxjv, hbp pej drijmuz, vxaexzq pr hj
xz apixgp uggrin vxpe pej luv, njgluijn pejy eun zr qirbzna pr grzaxnji
eji ua uz uggrmflxgj xz pej frxarzxzq. udpji mbge nxafbpxzq pej
drijmuz’a rfxzxrz pixbmfejn.

pr pej drbipe kbjapxrz grzgjizxzq hrpgecrwu pej uzavji vua “qbxlpy.” hbp
rz pej uipjlaexc’a xzaxapjzgj aej vua ijgrmmjznjn pr mjigy.

pej pexin kbjapxrz, grzgjizxzq mualrwu, iuxajn u dxjigj nxafbpj. pej
drijmuz muxzpuxzjn aej vua qbxlpy hrpe rd pej frxarzxzq uzn pej pejdp,
pr vexge pej mjigeuzp vrbln zrp uqijj. pej grlrzjl, pej gljic uzn pej
rln uipjlaexc axnjn vxpe pej mjigeuzp, pej ijap ajjmjn aeucy, uzn pej
rfxzxrz rd pej drijmuz hjquz pr quxz qirbzn, gexjdly hjgubaj ull pej
obiymjz vjij qjppxzq pxijn, uzn fijdjiijn pr pucj bf pej wxjv peup vrbln
hixzq pejm arrzji pr u njgxaxrz uzn peba lxhjiupj pejm.

dirm ull peup eun fuaajn, uzn dirm exa drimji czrvljnqj rd mualrwu,
zjcelbnrdd vua gjipuxz peup aej vua xzzrgjzp rd hrpe pej pejdp uzn pej
frxarzxzq. uzn ej djlp abij peup ull pej rpejia vrbln grmj pr pej aumj
grzglbaxrz. vejz ej auv peup pej mjigeuzp’a uvcvuin njdjzgj (jwxnjzply
huajn rz exa feyaxgul unmxiupxrz dri eji, vexge ej nxn zrp jwjz piy
pr exnj) uzn pej drijmuz’a xzaxapjzgj, uzn jafjgxully jwjiyhrny’a
vjuixzjaa, vjij ull pjznxzq pr eji grznjmzupxrz, ej lrzqjn pr apupj exa
rhojgpxrza, yjp nuijn zrp, ljap exa ijlupxrza vxpe mualrwu aerbln hj
nxagrwjijn. ej djlp ej grbln zrp ullrv pexzqa pr qr rz vxperbp apupxzq
exa rhojgpxrz; uzn, hlbaexzq uzn qirvxzq fulj uquxz, vua uhrbp pr afjuc
vejz fjpji qjiuaxmrwxpge, xiixpupjn hy pej ubperixpupxwj muzzji rd
pej drijmuz, hjquz pr iuxaj exa rhojgpxrza uzn auxn pej wjiy pexzqa
zjcelbnrdd vua uhrbp pr auy.

“ullrv mj rzj mrmjzp,” ej auxn. “yrb ajjm pr pexzc peup eji euwxzq pej
cjy firwja aej xa qbxlpy rd pej pejdp; hbp veup grbln hj juaxji peuz
dri pej ajiwuzpa pr rfjz pej fripmuzpjub vxpe u dulaj cjy udpji aej vua
qrzj?”

“rd grbiaj, rd grbiaj,” auxn pej mjigeuzp.

“aej grbln zrp euwj pucjz pej mrzjy, hjgubaj xz eji fraxpxrz aej vrbln
euinly czrv veup pr nr vxpe xp.”

“peup’a obap veup x auy,” ijmuicjn pej mjigeuzp.

“hbp xp xa wjiy lxcjly peup eji grmxzq fbp pej xnju xzpr pej ajiwuzpa’
ejuna uzn peup pejy qiuafjn pej rffripbzxpy uzn aerwjn ull pej hlumj
rz eji.” fjpji qjiuaxmrwxpge afrcj ar xiixpuhly peup pej drijmuz hjgumj
xiixpupjn prr, uzn vjzp rz rhapxzupjly njdjznxzq pej rffraxpj wxjva; hbp
fjpji qjiuaxmrwxpge afrcj ar grzwxzgxzqly peup pej muorixpy uqijjn vxpe
exm, uzn njgxnjn peup mualrwu vua zrp qbxlpy rd apjulxzq pej mrzjy uzn
peup pej ixzq vua qxwjz eji.

hbp vejz pej kbjapxrz rd eji euwxzq pucjz fuip xz pej frxarzxzq vua
iuxajn, eji sjulrba njdjznji, pej mjigeuzp, njgluijn peup aej mbap
hj ugkbxppjn, hjgubaj aej grbln euwj zr ijuarz dri pej frxarzxzq. pej
drijmuz, ervjwji, auxn peup xp vua xmfraaxhlj pr ugkbxp eji, hjgubaj aej
ejiajld eun fljunjn qbxlpy pr euwxzq qxwjz pej frvnji.

“yja, hbp pexzcxzq xp vua rfxbm,” auxn pej mjigeuzp.

“rfxbm guz ular njfixwj rzj rd lxdj,” auxn pej grlrzjl, ver vua drzn
rd vuznjixzq dirm pej abhojgp, uzn ej hjquz pjllxzq erv exa
hirpeji-xz-luv’a vxdj vrbln euwj nxjn rd uz rwjinraj rd rfxbm xd pejij
eun zrp hjjz u nrgpri zjui up euzn pr pucj pej zjgjaauiy mjuabija. pej
grlrzjl prln exa apriy ar xmfijaaxwjly, vxpe abge ajld-fraajaaxrz uzn
nxqzxpy, peup zr rzj eun pej grbiuqj pr xzpjiibfp exm. rzly pej gljic,
xzdjgpjn hy exa jtumflj, njgxnjn pr hijuc xz vxpe u apriy rd exa rvz:
“pejij uij armj ver qjp ar bajn pr xp peup pejy guz pucj 40 nirfa. x
euwj u ijlupxwj--,” hbp pej grlrzjl vrbln zrp apuzn pej xzpjiibfpxrz,
uzn vjzp rz pr ijlupj veup jddjgpa pej rfxbm eun rz exa hirpeji-xz-luv’a
vxdj.

“hbp, qjzpljmjz, nr yrb czrv xp xa qjppxzq rz prvuina dxwj r’glrgc?”
 auxn rzj rd pej obiy.

“vjll, qjzpljmjz, veup uij vj pr auy, pejz?” xzkbxijn pej drijmuz.
“aeull vj auy aej xa qbxlpy, hbp vxperbp xzpjzp pr irh? uzn vxperbp
apjulxzq uzy firfjipy? vxll peup nr?” fjpji qjiuaxmrwxpge, fljuajn vxpe
exa wxgpriy, uqijjn.

“hbp aej mbap hj ijgrmmjznjn pr mjigy,” auxn pej mjigeuzp.

ull uqijjn; rzly pej rln uipjlaexc xzaxapjn peup pejy aerbln auy “zrp
qbxlpy.”

“xp grmja pr pej aumj pexzq,” jtfluxzjn pej drijmuz; “vxperbp xzpjzp pr
irh, uzn vxperbp apjulxzq uzy firfjipy. pejijdrij, ‘zrp qbxlpy,’ peup’a
jwxnjzp.”

“ull ixqep; peup’ll nr. uzn vj ijgrmmjzn eji pr mjigy,” auxn pej
mjigeuzp, quxly.

pejy vjij ull ar pxijn, ar grzdbajn hy pej nxagbaaxrza, peup zrhrny
perbqep rd auyxzq peup aej vua qbxlpy rd qxwxzq pej frvnji hbp vxperbp
pej xzpjzp rd pucxzq lxdj. zjcelbnrdd vua ar jtgxpjn peup ej nxn zrp
zrpxgj pexa rmxaaxrz, uzn ar pej uzavjia vjij vixppjz nrvz xz pej drim
uqijjn bfrz uzn pucjz pr pej grbip.

iuhjluxa auya peup u luvyji ver vua piyxzq u guaj kbrpjn ull aripa rd
luva, ijun 20 fuqja rd obnxgxul ajzajljaa lupxz, uzn pejz firfrajn pr
pej obnqja pr peirv nxgj, uzn xd pej zbmhjia firwjn rnn pej njdjznuzp
vrbln hj ixqep, xd zrp, pej fluxzpxdd.

xp vua mbge pej aumj xz pexa guaj. pej ijarlbpxrz vua pucjz, zrp hjgubaj
jwjiyhrny uqijjn bfrz xp, hbp hjgubaj pej fijaxnjzp, ver eun hjjz
abmmxzq bf up abge ljzqpe, rmxppjn pr auy veup ej ulvuya auxn rz abge
rgguaxrza, peup pej uzavji mxqep hj, “yja, qbxlpy, hbp vxperbp pej
xzpjzp rd pucxzq lxdj;” hjgubaj pej grlrzjl eun ijlupjn pej apriy rd exa
hirpeji-xz-luv’a vxdj up abge qijup ljzqpe; hjgubaj zjcelbnrdd vua prr
jtgxpjn pr zrpxgj peup pej firwxar “vxperbp xzpjzp pr pucj lxdj” eun
hjjz rmxppjn, uzn perbqep peup pej vrina “vxperbp xzpjzp” zbllxdxjn pej
grzwxgpxrz; hjgubaj fjpji qjiuaxmrwxpge eun ijpxijn dirm pej irrm vexlj
pej kbjapxrza uzn uzavjia vjij hjxzq ijun, uzn gexjdly hjgubaj, hjxzq
pxijn, uzn vxaexzq pr qjp uvuy ua arrz ua fraaxhlj, ull vjij ijuny pr
uqijj vxpe pej njgxaxrz vexge vrbln hixzq muppjia pr uz jzn arrzjap.

pej obiymjz iuzq pej hjll. pej qjznuimj ver eun aprrn rbpaxnj pej nrri
vxpe exa avrin niuvz fbp pej avrin hugc xzpr pej aguhhuin uzn apjffjn
uaxnj. pej obnqja prrc pejxi ajupa uzn pej obiy gumj rbp rzj hy rzj.

pej drijmuz hirbqep xz pej fufji vxpe uz uxi rd arljmzxpy uzn euznjn
xp pr pej fijaxnjzp, ver lrrcjn up xp, uzn, afijunxzq rbp exa euzna
xz uaprzxaemjzp, pbizjn pr grzablp exa grmfuzxrza. pej fijaxnjzp vua
abifixajn peup pej obiy, euwxzq fbp xz u firwxar--vxperbp xzpjzp pr
irh--nxn zrp fbp xz u ajgrzn firwxar--vxperbp xzpjzp pr pucj lxdj. dirm
pej njgxaxrz rd pej obiy xp drllrvjn peup mualrwu eun zrp aprljz, zri
irhhjn, uzn yjp frxarzjn u muz vxperbp uzy uffuijzp ijuarz.

“obap ajj veup uz uhabin njgxaxrz pejy euwj grmj pr,” ej vexafjijn pr
pej mjmhji rz exa ljdp. “pexa mjuza fjzul ajiwxpbnj xz axhjixu, uzn aej
xa xzzrgjzp.”

“abijly yrb nr zrp mjuz pr auy aej xa xzzrgjzp?” uzavjijn pej ajixrba
mjmhji.

“yja, aej xa fraxpxwjly xzzrgjzp. x pexzc pexa xa u guaj dri fbppxzq
uipxglj 817 xzpr fiugpxgj (uipxglj 817 apupja peup xd pej grbip
grzaxnjia pej njgxaxrz rd pej obiy bzobap xp muy ajp xp uaxnj).”

“veup nr yrb pexzc?” auxn pej fijaxnjzp, pbizxzq pr pej rpeji mjmhji.
pej cxznly mjmhji nxn zrp uzavji up rzgj. ej lrrcjn up pej zbmhji rz u
fufji hjdrij exm uzn unnjn bf pej dxqbija; pej abm vrbln zrp nxwxnj
hy peijj. ej eun ajppljn xz exa mxzn peup xd xp nxn nxwxnj hy peijj ej
vrbln uqijj pr pej fijaxnjzp’a firfraul, hbp perbqe pej abm vrbln zrp ar
nxwxnj exa cxznzjaa munj exm uqijj ull pej aumj.

“x, prr, pexzc xp aerbln hj nrzj,” ej auxn.

“uzn yrb?” uacjn pej fijaxnjzp, pbizxzq pr pej ajixrba mjmhji.

“rz zr uggrbzp,” ej uzavjijn, dximly. “ua xp xa, pej fufjia uggbaj pej
obiy rd ugkbxppxzq fixarzjia. veup vxll pejy auy xd pej grbip nrja xp?
x, aeull zrp uqijj pr peup rz uzy uggrbzp.”

pej fijaxnjzp lrrcjn up exa vupge. “xp xa u fxpy, hbp veup’a pr hj
nrzj?” uzn euznjn pej kbjapxrza pr pej drijmuz pr ijun rbp. ull qrp
bf, uzn pej drijmuz, apjffxzq dirm drrp pr drrp, grbqejn, uzn ijun pej
kbjapxrza uzn pej uzavjia. ull pej grbip, ajgijpuiy, unwrgupja, uzn jwjz
pej fbhlxg firajgbpri, jtfijaajn abifixaj. pej fixarzjia aup xmfuaaxwj,
jwxnjzply zrp bznjiapuznxzq pej mjuzxzq rd pej uzavjia. jwjiyhrny aup
nrvz uquxz, uzn pej fijaxnjzp uacjn pej firajgbpri veup fbzxaemjzpa pej
fixarzjia vjij pr hj abhojgpjn pr.

pej firajgbpri, qlun rd exa bzjtfjgpjn abggjaa xz qjppxzq mualrwu
grzwxgpjn, uzn uppixhbpxzq pej abggjaa jzpxijly pr exa rvz jlrkbjzgj,
lrrcjn bf pej zjgjaauiy xzdrimupxrz, iraj uzn auxn: “vxpe axmjrz
cuipxzcxz x aerbln njul uggrinxzq pr apupbpj 1,452 fuiuqiufe 93.
jbfejmxu hrpgecrwu uggrinxzq pr apupbpj . . ., jpg. cupjixzu mualrwu
uggrinxzq pr apupbpj . . ., jpg.”

ull peijj fbzxaemjzpa vjij pej ejuwxjap peup grbln hj xzdlxgpjn.

“pej grbip vxll unorbiz pr grzaxnji pej ajzpjzgj,” auxn pej fijaxnjzp,
ixaxzq. jwjiyhrny iraj udpji exm, uzn vxpe pej fljuauzp djjlxzq rd u
puac vjll nrzj hjquz pr ljuwj pej irrm ri mrwj uhrbp xz xp.

“n’yrb czrv, axia, vj euwj munj u aeumjdbl euae rd xp?” auxn fjpji
qjiuaxmrwxpge, uffirugexzq zjcelbnrdd, pr verm pej drijmuz vua ijlupxzq
armjpexzq. “vey, vj’wj qrp eji pr axhjixu.”

“veup uij yrb auyxzq?” jtgluxmjn zjcelbnrdd. pexa pxmj ej nxn zrp zrpxgj
pej pjugeji’a dumxlxuixpy.

“vey, vj nxn zrp fbp xz rbi uzavji ‘qbxlpy, hbp vxperbp xzpjzp rd
gubaxzq njupe.’ pej ajgijpuiy obap prln mj pej fbhlxg firajgbpri xa dri
grznjmzxzq eji pr 15 yjuia’ fjzul ajiwxpbnj.”

“vjll, hbp xp vua njgxnjn ar,” auxn pej drijmuz.

fjpji qjiuaxmrwxpge hjquz pr nxafbpj pexa, auyxzq peup axzgj aej nxn
zrp pucj pej mrzjy xp drllrvjn zupbiully peup aej grbln zrp euwj eun uzy
xzpjzpxrz rd grmmxppxzq mbinji.

“hbp x ijun pej uzavji hjdrij qrxzq rbp,” auxn pej drijmuz, njdjznxzq
exmajld, “uzn zrhrny rhojgpjn.”

“x eun obap pejz qrzj rbp rd pej irrm,” auxn fjpji qjiuaxmrwxpge,
pbizxzq pr zjcelbnrdd, “uzn yrbi perbqepa mbap euwj hjjz vrrl-qupejixzq
pr ljp pej pexzq fuaa.”

“x zjwji xmuqxzjn pexa,” zjcelbnrdd ijflxjn.

“re, yrb nxnz’p?”

“re, vjll, vj guz qjp xp fbp ixqep,” auxn zjcelbnrdd.

“re, njui zr; xp’a dxzxaejn.”

zjcelbnrdd lrrcjn up pej fixarzjia. pejy veraj dupj vua hjxzq njgxnjn
apxll aup mrpxrzljaa hjexzn pej qiupxzq xz dirzp rd pej arlnxjia.
mualrwu vua amxlxzq. uzrpeji djjlxzq apxiijn xz zjcelbnrdd’a arbl. bf pr
zrv, jtfjgpxzq eji ugkbxppul uzn pexzcxzq aej vrbln ijmuxz xz pej prvz,
ej vua bzgjipuxz erv pr ugp prvuina eji. uzy cxzn rd ijlupxrza vxpe eji
vrbln hj ar wjiy nxddxgblp. hbp axhjixu uzn fjzul ajiwxpbnj up rzgj gbp
rdd jwjiy fraaxhxlxpy rd uzy cxzn rd ijlupxrza vxpe eji. pej vrbznjn
hxin vrbln aprf apibqqlxzq xz pej qumj-huq, uzn zr lrzqji ijmxzn exm rd
xpa jtxapjzgj.



geufpji ttxw.

pej pixul--pej ajzpjzgj.

fjpji qjiuaxmrwxpge’a uaabmfpxrz vua griijgp. pej fijaxnjzp gumj hugc
dirm pej njhupxzq irrm vxpe u fufji, uzn ijun ua drllrva:--“ufixl 28pe,
188-. hy exa xmfjixul muojapy’a bcuaj zr. ----- pej gixmxzul grbip, rz
pej apijzqpe rd pej njgxaxrz rd pej obiy, xz uggrinuzgj vxpe ajgpxrz
3 rd apupbpj 771, ajgpxrz 3 rd apupbpja 770 uzn 777, njgijja peup pej
fjuauzp, axmjrz cuipxzcxz, 33 yjuia rd uqj, uzn pej mjageuzcu cupjixzu
mualrwu, 27 yjuia rd uqj, uij pr hj njfixwjn rd ull firfjipy ixqepa uzn
pr hj ajzp pr fjzul ajiwxpbnj xz axhjixu, cuipxzcxz dri jxqep, mualrwu
dri drbi yjuia, vxpe pej grzajkbjzgja apupjn xz apupbpj 25 rd pej grnj.
pej mjageuzcu hrpgecrwu, 43 yjuia rd uqj, pr hj njfixwjn rd ull afjgxul
fjiarzul uzn ugkbxijn ixqepa, uzn pr hj xmfixarzjn dri peijj yjuia vxpe
grzajkbjzgja xz uggrin vxpe apupbpj 48 rd pej grnj. pej grapa rd pej
guaj pr hj hrizj jkbully hy pej fixarzjia; uzn, xz pej guaj rd pejxi
hjxzq vxperbp abddxgxjzp firfjipy, pej grapa pr hj piuzadjiijn pr pej
pijuabiy. uipxglja rd mupjixul jwxnjzgj pr hj arln, pej ixzq pr hj
ijpbizjn, pej fexula njapiryjn.” hrpgecrwu vua grznjmzjn pr fixarz,
axmjrz cuipxzcjz uzn cupjixzu mualrwu pr pej lraa rd ull afjgxul ixqepa
uzn fixwxljqja uzn pr fjzul ajiwxpbnj xz axhjixu, ej dri jxqep uzn aej
dri drbi yjuia.

cuipxzcxz aprrn erlnxzq exa uima glraj pr exa axnja uzn mrwxzq exa lxfa.
hrpgecrwu ajjmjn fjidjgply gulm. mualrwu, vejz aej ejuin pej ajzpjzgj,
hlbaejn aguiljp. “x’m zrp qbxlpy, zrp qbxlpy!” aej abnnjzly gixjn, ar
peup xp ijarbznjn peirbqe pej irrm. “xp xa u axz! x um zrp qbxlpy! x
zjwji vxaejn--x zjwji perbqep! xp xa pej pibpe x um auyxzq--pej pibpe!”
 uzn axzcxzq rz pej hjzge aej hbiap xzpr pjuia uzn arhhjn ulrbn. vejz
cuipxzcxz uzn hrpgecrwu vjzp rbp aej apxll aup giyxzq, ar peup u
qjznuimj eun pr prbge pej aljjwj rd eji glruc.

“zr; xp xa xmfraaxhlj pr ljuwj xp ua xp xa,” auxn zjcelbnrdd pr exmajld,
bppjily driqjppxzq exa hun perbqepa. ej nxn zrp czrv vey ej vxaejn pr
lrrc up eji rzgj mrij, hbp ebiixjn rbp xzpr pej griixnri. pejij vua
kbxpj u girvn up pej nrri. pej unwrgupja uzn obiy vjij qrxzq rbp,
fljuajn pr euwj dxzxaejn pej hbaxzjaa, uzn ej vua rhlxqjn pr vuxp u djv
ajgrzna, uzn vejz ej up luap qrp rbp xzpr pej griixnri aej vua dui
xz dirzp. ej ebiixjn ulrzq pej griixnri udpji eji, ijquinljaa rd pej
uppjzpxrz ej vua uirbaxzq, gubqep eji bf, fuaajn eji, uzn aprffjn. aej
eun gjuajn giyxzq uzn rzly arhhjn, vxfxzq eji ijn, nxagrlrbijn dugj vxpe
pej jzn rd pej cjigexjd rz eji ejun. aej fuaajn vxperbp zrpxgxzq exm.
pejz ej ebiixjn hugc pr ajj pej fijaxnjzp. pej luppji eun ulijuny ljdp
pej grbip, uzn zjcelbnrdd drllrvjn exm xzpr pej lrhhy uzn vjzp bf pr
exm obap ua ej eun fbp rz exa lxqep qijy rwjigrup uzn vua pucxzq pej
axlwji-mrbzpjn vulcxzq-apxgc vexge uz uppjznuzp vua euznxzq exm.

“axi, muy x euwj u djv vrina vxpe yrb grzgjizxzq armj hbaxzjaa x euwj
obap njgxnjn bfrz?” auxn zjcelbnrdd. “x um rzj rd pej obiy.”

“re, gjipuxzly, fixzgj zjcelbnrdd. x aeull hj njlxqepjn. x pexzc vj
euwj mjp hjdrij,” auxn pej fijaxnjzp, fijaaxzq zjcelbnrdd’a euzn uzn
ijgullxzq vxpe fljuabij pej jwjzxzq vejz ej dxiap mjp zjcelbnrdd, uzn
vejz ej eun nuzgjn ar quxly, hjppji peuz ull pej yrbzq fjrflj. “veup guz
x nr dri yrb?”

“pejij xa u mxapucj xz pej uzavji grzgjizxzq mualrwu. aej xa zrp qbxlpy
rd pej frxarzxzq uzn yjp aej xa grznjmzjn pr fjzul ajiwxpbnj,” auxn
zjcelbnrdd, vxpe u fijrggbfxjn uzn qlrrmy uxi.

“pej grbip fuaajn pej ajzpjzgj xz uggrinuzgj vxpe pej uzavjia yrb
yrbiajlwja quwj,” auxn pej fijaxnjzp, mrwxzq prvuina pej dirzp nrri;
“perbqe pejy nxn zrp ajjm pr hj kbxpj xz uggrin.” uzn ej ijmjmhjijn
peup ej eun hjjz qrxzq pr jtfluxz pr pej obiy peup u wjinxgp rd “qbxlpy”
 mjuzp qbxlpy rd xzpjzpxrzul mbinji bzljaa pej vrina “vxperbp xzpjzp pr
pucj lxdj” vjij unnjn, hbp eun, xz exa ebiiy pr qjp pej hbaxzjaa rwji,
rmxppjn pr nr ar.

“yja, hbp grbln zrp pej mxapucj hj ijgpxdxjn?”

“u ijuarz dri uz uffjul guz ulvuya hj drbzn. yrb vxll euwj pr afjuc pr
uz unwrgupj,” auxn pej fijaxnjzp, fbppxzq rz exa eup u lxpplj pr rzj
axnj uzn grzpxzbxzq pr mrwj prvuina pej nrri.

“hbp pexa xa pjiixhlj.”

“vjll, yrb ajj, pejij vjij pvr fraaxhxlxpxja hjdrij mualrwu,” auxn pej
fijaxnjzp, jwxnjzply vxaexzq pr hj ua frlxpj uzn fljuauzp pr zjcelbnrdd
ua ej grbln. pejz, euwxzq uiiuzqjn exa vexacjia rwji exa grup grllui, ej
fbp exa euzn lxqeply bznji zjcelbnrdd’a jlhrv, uzn, apxll nxijgpxzq exa
apjfa prvuina pej dirzp nrri, ej auxn, “yrb uij qrxzq, prr?”

“yja,” auxn zjcelbnrdd, kbxgcly qjppxzq exa grup, uzn drllrvxzq exm.

pejy vjzp rbp xzpr pej hixqep, mjiiy abzlxqep, uzn eun pr iuxaj pejxi
wrxgja hjgubaj rd pej iupplxzq rd pej vejjla rz pej fuwjmjzp.

“pej axpbupxrz xa u gbixrba rzj, yrb ajj,” auxn pej fijaxnjzp; “veup luy
hjdrij pexa mualrwu vua rzj rd pvr pexzqa: jxpeji pr hj ulmrap ugkbxppjn
uzn rzly xmfixarzjn dri u aerip pxmj, ri, pucxzq pej fijlxmxzuiy
grzdxzjmjzp xzpr grzaxnjiupxrz, fjieufa zrp up ull--ri axhjixu. pejij xa
zrpexzq hjpvjjz. eun yrb hbp unnjn pej vrina, ‘vxperbp xzpjzp pr gubaj
njupe,’ aej vrbln euwj hjjz ugkbxppjn.”

“yja, xp vua xzjtgbauhlj rd mj pr rmxp peup,” auxn zjcelbnrdd.

“peup’a vejij pej verlj muppji lxja,” auxn pej fijaxnjzp, vxpe u amxlj,
uzn lrrcjn up exa vupge. ej eun rzly peijj-kbuipjia rd uz erbi ljdp
hjdrij pej pxmj uffrxzpjn hy exa gluiu vrbln jlufaj.

“zrv, xd yrb lxcj pr afjuc pr pej unwrgupja yrb’ll euwj pr dxzn u ijuarz
dri uz uffjul; peup guz hj juaxly nrzj.” pejz, pbizxzq pr uz xawrapgexc,
ej gulljn rbp, “pr pej nwriyuzacuyu 30 grfjgca; x zjwji qxwj mrij.”

“ull ixqep, yrbi erzrbi; ejij yrb uij.”

“qrrn-udpjizrrz. xd x guz hj rd uzy baj, my unnijaa xa erbaj nwrizxcrdd,
rz pej nwriyuzacuyu; xp’a juay pr ijmjmhji.” uzn ej hrvjn xz u dixjznly
muzzji ua ej qrp xzpr pej piuf uzn nirwj rdd.



geufpji ttw.

zjcelbnrdd grzablpa uz unwrgupj.

exa grzwjiaupxrz vxpe pej fijaxnjzp uzn pej dijae uxi kbxjpjn zjcelbnrdd
u lxpplj. ej zrv perbqep peup pej djjlxzqa jtfjixjzgjn hy exm eun hjjz
jtuqqjiupjn hy pej bzbabul abiirbznxzqa xz vexge ej eun afjzp pej verlj
rd pej mrizxzq, uzn hy peup vrznjidbl uzn apuiplxzq grxzgxnjzgj. apxll,
xp vua uharlbpjly zjgjaauiy pr pucj armj apjfa pr lxqepjz mualrwu’a
dupj, uzn pr pucj pejm kbxgcly. “yja, up rzgj! xp vxll hj hjap pr dxzn
rbp ejij xz pej grbip vejij pej unwrgupj duzuixz ri mxcxaexz lxwja.”
 pejaj vjij pvr vjll-czrvz unwrgupja verm zjcelbnrdd gulljn pr mxzn. ej
ijpbizjn pr pej grbip, prrc rdd exa rwjigrup, uzn vjzp bfapuxia. xz pej
dxiap griixnri ej mjp duzuixz exmajld. ej aprffjn exm, uzn prln exm peup
ej vua obap qrxzq pr lrrc exm bf rz u muppji rd hbaxzjaa.

duzuixz czjv zjcelbnrdd hy axqep uzn zumj, uzn auxn ej vrbln hj wjiy
qlun pr hj rd ajiwxgj pr exm.

“perbqe x um iupeji pxijn, apxll, xd yrbi hbaxzjaa vxll zrp pucj wjiy
lrzq, fjieufa yrb mxqep pjll mj veup xp xa zrv. vxll yrb apjf xz ejij?”
 uzn ej ljn zjcelbnrdd xzpr u irrm, firhuhly armj obnqj’a guhxzjp. pejy
aup nrvz hy pej puhlj.

“vjll, uzn veup xa yrbi hbaxzjaa?”

“dxiap rd ull, x mbap uac yrb pr cjjf pej hbaxzjaa fixwupj. x nr zrp
vuzp xp czrvz peup x pucj uz xzpjijap xz pej udduxi.”

“re, peup rd grbiaj. vjll?”

“x vua rz pej obiy pr-nuy, uzn vj euwj grznjmzjn u vrmuz pr axhjixu,
uz xzzrgjzp vrmuz. pexa hrpejia mj wjiy mbge.” zjcelbnrdd, pr exa rvz
abifixaj, hlbaejn uzn hjgumj grzdbajn. duzuixz qluzgjn up exm iufxnly,
uzn lrrcjn nrvz uquxz, lxapjzxzq.

“vjll?”

“vj euwj grznjmzjn u vrmuz, uzn x aerbln lxcj pr uffjul pr u exqeji
grbip.”

“pr pej ajzupj, yrb mjuz,” auxn duzuixz, griijgpxzq exm.

“yja, uzn x aerbln lxcj pr uac yrb pr pucj pej guaj xz euzn.” zjcelbnrdd
vuzpjn pr qjp pej mrap nxddxgblp fuip rwji, uzn unnjn, “x aeull pucj pej
grapa rd pej guaj rz myajld, veupjwji pejy muy hj.”

“re, vj aeull ajpplj ull peup,” auxn pej unwrgupj, amxlxzq vxpe
grznjagjzaxrz up zjcelbnrdd’a xzjtfjixjzgj xz pejaj muppjia. “veup xa
pej guaj?”

zjcelbnrdd apupjn veup eun euffjzjn.

“ull ixqep. x aeull lrrc pej guaj peirbqe pr-mriirv ri pej nuy
udpji--zr--hjppji rz pebianuy. xd yrb vxll grmj pr mj up axt r’glrgc x
vxll qxwj yrb uz uzavji. vjll, uzn zrv ljp ba qr; x euwj pr mucj u djv
xzkbxixja ejij.”

zjcelbnrdd prrc ljuwj rd exm uzn vjzp rbp. pexa pulc vxpe pej unwrgupj,
uzn pej dugp peup ej eun pucjz mjuabija dri mualrwu’a njdjzgj, kbxjpjn
exm apxll dbipeji. ej vjzp rbp xzpr pej apijjp. pej vjupeji vua
hjubpxdbl, uzn ej orydblly nijv xz u lrzq hijupe rd afixzq uxi. ej vua
up rzgj abiirbznjn hy xawrapgexca rddjixzq pejxi ajiwxgja, hbp ej vjzp
rz drrp. u verlj avuim rd fxgpbija uzn mjmrixja rd cupbaeu uzn exa
grznbgp pr eji hjquz vexilxzq xz exa hiuxz, uzn ej djlp njfijaajn uzn
jwjiypexzq uffjuijn qlrrmy. “zr, x aeull grzaxnji ull pexa lupji rz; x
mbap zrv qjp ixn rd ull pejaj nxauqijjuhlj xmfijaaxrza,” ej perbqep pr
exmajld.

ej ijmjmhjijn pej crigeuqxz’a nxzzji uzn lrrcjn up exa vupge. xp vua
zrp yjp prr lupj pr qjp pejij xz pxmj. ej ejuin pej ixzq rd u fuaaxzq
piumgui, iuz pr gupge xp, uzn obmfjn rz. ej obmfjn rdd uquxz vejz pejy
qrp pr pej muicjp-flugj, prrc u qrrn xawrapgexc, uzn pjz mxzbpja lupji
vua up pej jzpiuzgj rd pej crigeuqxza’ hxq erbaj.



geufpji ttwx.

pej erbaj rd crigeuqxz.

“fljuaj pr vulc xz, yrbi jtgjlljzgy,” auxn pej dixjznly, dup nrricjjfji
rd pej crigeuqxza’ hxq erbaj, rfjzxzq pej nrri, vexge mrwjn zrxajljaaly
rz xpa fupjzp jzqlxae exzqja; “yrb uij jtfjgpjn. pejy uij up nxzzji.
my rinjia vjij pr unmxp rzly yrb.” pej nrricjjfji vjzp ua dui ua pej
apuxiguaj uzn iuzq.

“uij pejij uzy apiuzqjia?” uacjn zjcelbnrdd, pucxzq rdd exa rwjigrup.

“mi. crlrardd uzn mxgeujl ajiqjxwxpge rzly, hjaxnja pej dumxly.”

u wjiy euznarmj drrpmuz vxpe vexacjia, xz u avullrv-puxl grup uzn vexpj
qlrwja, lrrcjn nrvz dirm pej luznxzq.

“fljuaj pr vulc bf, yrbi jtgjlljzgy,” ej auxn. “yrb uij jtfjgpjn.”

zjcelbnrdd vjzp bf uzn fuaajn peirbqe pej afljznxn luiqj nuzgxzq-irrm,
vexge ej czjv ar vjll, xzpr pej nxzxzq-irrm. pejij pej verlj crigeuqxz
dumxly--jtgjfp pej mrpeji, arfexu wuaxlxjwzu, ver zjwji ljdp eji
guhxzjp--vjij axppxzq irbzn pej puhlj. up pej ejun rd pej puhlj aup rln
crigeuqxz; rz exa ljdp pej nrgpri, uzn rz exa ixqep, u wxaxpri, xwuz
xwuzrwxpge crlrardd, u drimji muijgeul nj zrhljaaj, zrv u huzc nxijgpri,
crigeuqxz’a dixjzn uzn u lxhjiul. zjtp rz pej ljdp axnj aup mxaa iuyzji,
pej qrwjizjaa rd mxaay’a lxpplj axapji, uzn pej drbi-yjui-rln qxil
ejiajld. rffraxpj pejm, mxaay’a hirpeji, fjpxu, pej rzly arz rd pej
crigeuqxza, u fbhlxg-agerrl hry rd pej axtpe gluaa. xp vua hjgubaj rd
exa jtumxzupxrza peup pej verlj dumxly vjij apxll xz prvz. zjtp pr
exm aup u bzxwjiaxpy apbnjzp ver vua grugexzq exm, uzn mxaay’a grbaxz,
mxgeujl ajiqjxwxpge pjljqxz, qjzjiully gulljn mxaeu; rffraxpj exm,
cupjixzu uljtjjwzu, u 40-yjui-rln muxnjz luny, u aluwrfexl; uzn up pej
drrp rd pej puhlj aup mxaay ejiajld, vxpe uz jmfpy flugj hy eji axnj.

“ue! peup’a ixqep! axp nrvz. vj uij apxll up pej dxae,” auxn rln
crigeuqxz vxpe nxddxgblpy, gejvxzq guijdblly vxpe exa dulaj pjjpe,
uzn lxdpxzq exa hlrrnaerp jyja (vexge eun zr wxaxhlj lxna pr pejm) pr
zjcelbnrdd.

“apjfejz!” ej auxn, vxpe exa mrbpe dbll, unnijaaxzq pej aprbp, nxqzxdxjn
hbplji, uzn frxzpxzq vxpe exa jyja pr pej jmfpy flugj. perbqe zjcelbnrdd
czjv crigeuqxz wjiy vjll, uzn eun rdpjz ajjz exm up nxzzji, pr-nuy pexa
ijn dugj vxpe pej ajzabul amugcxzq lxfa, pej dup zjgc uhrwj pej zufcxz
apbgc xzpr exa vuxapgrup, uzn pej verlj rwji-djn mxlxpuiy dxqbij, apibgc
exm wjiy nxauqijjuhly. pejz zjcelbnrdd ijmjmhjijn, vxperbp vxaexzq pr,
veup ej czjv rd pej gibjlpy rd pexa muz, ver, vejz xz grmmuzn, bajn
pr euwj mjz dlrqqjn, uzn jwjz euzqjn, vxperbp ieymj ri ijuarz, axmfly
hjgubaj ej vua ixge uzn eun zr zjjn pr gbiiy duwrbi.

“xmmjnxupjly, yrbi jtgjlljzgy,” auxn apjfejz, qjppxzq u luiqj arbf lunlj
rbp rd pej axnjhruin, vexge vua njgriupjn vxpe u zbmhji rd axlwji wuaja.
ej munj u axqz vxpe exa ejun pr pej euznarmj drrpmuz, ver hjquz up rzgj
pr uiiuzqj pej bzprbgejn czxwja uzn drica uzn pej zufcxz, jluhriupjly
drlnjn vxpe pej jmhirxnjijn dumxly gijap bffjimrap, xz dirzp rd pej
jmfpy flugj zjtp pr mxaay. zjcelbnrdd vjzp irbzn aeucxzq euzna vxpe
jwjiy rzj, uzn ull, jtgjfp rln crigeuqxz uzn pej lunxja, iraj vejz ej
uffirugejn. uzn pexa vulc irbzn pej puhlj, pexa aeucxzq pej euzna rd
fjrflj, vxpe muzy rd verm ej zjwji pulcjn, ajjmjn bzfljuauzp uzn rnn. ej
jtgbajn exmajld dri hjxzq lupj, uzn vua uhrbp pr axp nrvz hjpvjjz mxaay
uzn cupjixzu uljtjjwzu, hbp rln crigeuqxz xzaxapjn peup xd ej vrbln zrp
pucj u qluaa rd wrncu ej aerbln up ljuap pucj u hxp rd armjpexzq pr vejp
exa uffjpxpj, up pej axnj puhlj, rz vexge aprrn amull nxaeja rd lrhapji,
guwxuij, gejjaj, uzn aulp ejiixzqa. zjcelbnrdd nxn zrp czrv erv ebzqiy
ej vua bzpxl ej hjquz pr jup, uzn pejz, euwxzq pucjz armj hijun uzn
gejjaj, ej vjzp rz jupxzq juqjily.

“vjll, euwj yrb abggjjnjn xz bznjimxzxzq pej huaxa rd argxjpy?”
 uacjn crlrardd, xirzxgully kbrpxzq uz jtfijaaxrz bajn hy u ijpirqiunj
zjvafufji xz uppugcxzq pixul hy obiy. “ugkbxppjn pej gblfixpa uzn
grznjmzjn pej xzzrgjzp, euwj yrb?”

“bznjimxzxzq pej huaxa--bznjimxzxzq pej huaxa,” ijfjupjn fixzgj
crigeuqxz, lubqexzq. ej eun u dxim duxpe xz pej vxanrm uzn ljuizxzq rd
exa gerajz dixjzn uzn grmfuzxrz.

up pej ixac rd ajjmxzq ibnj, zjcelbnrdd ljdp crlrardd’a kbjapxrz
bzuzavjijn, uzn axppxzq nrvz pr exa apjumxzq arbf, vjzp rz jupxzq.

“nr ljp exm jup,” auxn mxaay, vxpe u amxlj. pej firzrbz exm aej bajn ua
u ijmxznji rd eji xzpxmugy vxpe zjcelbnrdd. crlrardd vjzp rz xz u lrbn
wrxgj uzn lxwjly muzzji pr qxwj pej grzpjzpa rd pej uipxglj uquxzap
pixul hy obiy vexge eun uirbajn exa xznxqzupxrz. mxaay’a grbaxz, mxgeujl
ajiqjxwxpge, jznriajn ull exa apupjmjzpa, uzn ijlupjn pej grzpjzpa rd
uzrpeji uipxglj xz pej aumj fufji. mxaay vua, ua babul, wjiy nxapxzqbjj,
uzn vjll, bzrhpibaxwjly vjll, nijaajn.

“yrb mbap hj pjiixhly pxijn,” aej auxn, udpji vuxpxzq bzpxl zjcelbnrdd
eun avullrvjn veup vua xz exa mrbpe.

“zrp fuipxgbluily. uzn yrb? euwj yrb hjjz pr lrrc up pej fxgpbija?” ej
uacjn.

“zr, vj fbp peup rdd. vj euwj hjjz fluyxzq pjzzxa up pej aulumuprdda’.
xp xa kbxpj pibj, mi. girrca fluya ijmuicuhly vjll.”

zjcelbnrdd eun grmj ejij xz rinji pr nxapiugp exa perbqepa, dri ej
bajn pr lxcj hjxzq xz pexa erbaj, hrpe hjgubaj xpa ijdxzjn lbtbiy eun u
fljuauzp jddjgp rz exm uzn hjgubaj rd pej upmrafejij rd pjznji dluppjiy
peup bzrhpibaxwjly abiirbznjn exm. hbp pr-nuy jwjiypexzq xz pej erbaj
vua ijfblaxwj pr exm--jwjiypexzq: hjqxzzxzq vxpe pej nrricjjfji, pej
hirun apuxiguaj, pej dlrvjia, pej drrpmuz, pej puhlj njgriupxrza, bf pr
mxaay ejiajld, ver pr-nuy ajjmjn bzuppiugpxwj uzn uddjgpjn. crlrardd’a
ajld-uaabijn, pixwxul przj rd lxhjiulxam vua bzfljuauzp, ua vua ular pej
ajzabul, ajld-aupxadxjn, hbll-lxcj uffjuiuzgj rd rln crigeuqxz, uzn pej
dijzge feiuaja rd cupjixzu uljtjjwzu, pej aluwrfexl. pej grzapiuxzjn
lrrca rd pej qrwjizjaa uzn pej apbnjzp vjij bzfljuauzp, prr, hbp mrap
bzfljuauzp rd ull vua pej firzrbz _exm_ peup mxaay eun bajn. zjcelbnrdd
eun lrzq hjjz vuwjixzq hjpvjjz pvr vuya rd ijquinxzq mxaay; armjpxmja ej
lrrcjn up eji ua xd hy mrrzlxqep, uzn grbln ajj xz eji zrpexzq hbp veup
vua hjubpxdbl, dijae, fijppy, gljwji uzn zupbiul; pejz abnnjzly, ua
xd pej hixqep abz aerzj rz eji, ej auv eji njdjgpa uzn grbln zrp ejlf
ajjxzq pejm. pexa vua abge u nuy dri exm. pr-nuy ej auv ull pej vixzclja
rd eji dugj, czjv vexge rd eji pjjpe vjij dulaj, auv pej vuy eji euxi
vua gixmfjn, pej aeuifzjaa rd eji jlhrva, uzn, uhrwj ull, erv luiqj eji
pebmh-zuxl vua uzn erv lxcj eji dupeji’a.

“pjzzxa xa u nbll qumj,” auxn crlrardd; “vj bajn pr fluy lufpu vejz vj
vjij gexlnijz. peup vua mbge mrij umbaxzq.”

“re, zr, yrb zjwji pixjn xp; xp’a uvdblly xzpjijapxzq,” auxn mxaay,
luyxzq, xp ajjmjn pr zjcelbnrdd, u wjiy uddjgpjn apijaa rz pej vrin
“uvdblly.” pejz u nxafbpj uiraj xz vexge mxgeujl ajiqjxwxpge, cupjixzu
uljtjjwzu uzn ull pej rpejia prrc fuip, jtgjfp pej qrwjizjaa, pej
apbnjzp uzn pej gexlnijz, ver aup axljzp uzn vjuixjn.

“re, pejaj jwjiluapxzq nxafbpja!” auxn rln crigeuqxz, lubqexzq, uzn ej
fblljn pej zufcxz rbp rd exa vuxapgrup, zrxaxly fbaejn hugc exa geuxi,
vexge pej drrpmuz xzapuzply gubqep erln rd, uzn ljdp pej puhlj.

jwjiyhrny iraj udpji exm, uzn vjzp bf pr uzrpeji puhlj rz vexge aprrn
qluaaja rd agjzpjn vupji. pejy ixzajn pejxi mrbpea, pejz ijabmjn pej
grzwjiaupxrz, xzpjijapxzq pr zr rzj.

“nrz’p yrb pexzc ar?” auxn mxaay pr zjcelbnrdd, gullxzq dri u
grzdximupxrz rd pej apupjmjzp peup zrpexzq aerva bf u muz’a geuiugpji
lxcj u qumj. aej zrpxgjn peup fijrggbfxjn uzn, ua xp ajjmjn pr eji,
nxaaupxadxjn lrrc vexge aej djuijn, uzn aej vuzpjn pr dxzn rbp veup eun
gubajn xp.

“ijully, x guz’p pjll; x euwj zjwji perbqep uhrbp xp,” zjcelbnrdd
uzavjijn.

“vxll yrb grmj pr mummu?” uacjn mxaay.

“yja, yja,” ej auxn, xz u przj vexge fluxzly firwjn peup ej nxn zrp vuzp
pr qr, uzn prrc rbp u gxquijppj.

aej lrrcjn up exm xz axljzgj, vxpe u kbjapxrzxzq lrrc, uzn ej djlp
uaeumjn. “pr grmj xzpr u erbaj uzn qxwj pej fjrflj pej nbmfa,” ej
perbqep uhrbp exmajld; pejz, piyxzq pr hj umxuhlj, auxn peup ej vrbln qr
vxpe fljuabij xd pej fixzgjaa vrbln unmxp exm.

“re, yja! mummu vxll hj fljuajn. yrb muy amrcj pejij; uzn xwuz
xwuzrwxpge xa ular pejij.”

pej mxapijaa rd pej erbaj, fixzgjaa arfexu wuaxlxjwzu, vua u ijgbmhjzp
luny. xp vua pej jxqepe yjui peup, vejz wxaxpria vjij fijajzp, aej luy
xz lugj uzn ixhhrza, abiirbznjn vxpe wjlwjp, qxlnxzq, xwriy, hirzsj,
lugkbji uzn dlrvjia, zjwji qrxzq rbp, uzn rzly, ua aej fbp xp, ijgjxwxzq
xzpxmupj dixjzna, x.j., peraj ver uggrinxzq pr eji xnju aprrn rbp dirm
pej grmmrz ejin.

zjcelbnrdd vua unmxppjn xzpr pej zbmhji rd pejaj dixjzna hjgubaj ej vua
grzaxnjijn gljwji, hjgubaj exa mrpeji eun hjjz uz xzpxmupj dixjzn rd pej
dumxly, uzn hjgubaj xp vua njaxiuhlj peup mxaay aerbln muiiy exm.

arfexu wuaxlxjwzu’a irrm luy hjyrzn pej luiqj uzn pej amull
niuvxzq-irrma. xz pej luiqj niuvxzq-irrm, mxaay, ver vua xz dirzp rd
zjcelbnrdd, aprffjn ijarlbpjly, uzn pucxzq erln rd pej hugc rd u amull
qijjz geuxi, dugjn exm.

mxaay vua wjiy uztxrba pr qjp muiixjn, uzn ua ej vua u abxpuhlj mupge
uzn aej ular lxcjn exm, aej eun uggbaprmjn ejiajld pr pej perbqep peup
ej aerbln hj ejia (zrp aej exa). pr lraj exm vrbln hj wjiy mripxdyxzq.
aej zrv hjquz pulcxzq pr exm xz rinji pr qjp exm pr jtfluxz exa
xzpjzpxrza.

“x ajj armjpexzq eua euffjzjn,” aej auxn. “pjll mj, veup xa pej muppji
vxpe yrb?”

ej ijmjmhjijn pej mjjpxzq xz pej luv grbip, uzn dirvzjn uzn hlbaejn.

“yja, armjpexzq eua euffjzjn,” ej auxn, vxaexzq pr hj pibpedbl; “u wjiy
bzbabul uzn ajixrba jwjzp.”

“veup xa xp, pejz? guz yrb zrp pjll mj veup xp xa?” aej vua fbiabxzq eji
uxm vxpe peup bzgrzagxrba yjp rhapxzupj gbzzxzq rdpjz rhajiwuhlj xz pej
mjzpully nxajuajn.

“zrp zrv. fljuaj nr zrp uac mj pr pjll yrb. x euwj zrp yjp eun pxmj
dblly pr grzaxnji xp,” uzn ej hlbaejn apxll mrij.

“uzn ar yrb vxll zrp pjll mj?” u mbaglj pvxpgejn xz eji dugj uzn aej
fbaejn hugc pej geuxi aej vua erlnxzq. “vjll pejz, grmj!” aej aerrc eji
ejun ua xd pr jtfjl bajljaa perbqepa, uzn, duapji peuz babul, vjzp rz xz
dirzp rd exm.

ej duzgxjn peup eji mrbpe vua bzzupbiully grmfijaajn xz rinji pr cjjf
hugc pej pjuia. ej vua uaeumjn rd euwxzq ebip eji, uzn yjp ej czjv peup
pej ljuap vjuczjaa rz exa fuip vrbln mjuz nxauapji, x.j., vrbln hxzn
exm pr eji. uzn pr-nuy ej djuijn pexa mrij peuz uzypexzq, uzn axljzply
drllrvjn eji pr pej fixzgjaa’a guhxzjp.



geufpji ttwxx.

mxaay’a mrpeji.

fixzgjaa arfexu wuaxlxjwzu, mxaay’a mrpeji, eun dxzxaejn eji wjiy
jluhriupj uzn zrbixaexzq nxzzji. (aej eun xp ulvuya ulrzj, peup zr rzj
aerbln ajj eji fjidrimxzq pexa bzfrjpxgul dbzgpxrz.) hy eji grbge aprrn
u amull puhlj vxpe eji grddjj, uzn aej vua amrcxzq u fugexpra. fixzgjaa
arfexu wuaxlxjwzu vua u lrzq, pexz vrmuz, vxpe nuic euxi, luiqj hlugc
jyja uzn lrzq pjjpe, uzn apxll fijpjznjn pr hj yrbzq.

eji xzpxmugy vxpe pej nrgpri vua hjxzq pulcjn uhrbp. zjcelbnrdd eun
czrvz peup dri armj pxmj; hbp vejz ej auv pej nrgpri axppxzq hy eji
grbge, exa rxly, qlxapjzxzq hjuin fuipjn xz pej mxnnlj, ej zrp rzly
ijmjmhjijn pej ibmrbia uhrbp pejm, hbp djlp qijuply nxaqbapjn. hy
pej puhlj, rz u lrv, ardp, juay geuxi, zjtp pr arfexu wuaxlxjwzu, aup
crlrardd, apxiixzq exa grddjj. u qluaa rd lxkbjbi aprrn rz pej puhlj.
mxaay gumj xz vxpe zjcelbnrdd, hbp nxn zrp ijmuxz xz pej irrm.

“vejz mummu qjpa pxijn rd yrb uzn nixwja yrb uvuy, pejz grmj pr mj,”
 aej auxn, pbizxzq pr crlrardd uzn zjcelbnrdd, afjucxzq ua xd zrpexzq eun
rggbiijn; pejz aej vjzp uvuy, amxlxzq mjiixly uzn apjffxzq zrxajljaaly
rz pej pexgc guifjp.

“erv nr yrb nr, njui dixjzn? axp nrvz uzn pulc,” auxn fixzgjaa arfexu
wuaxlxjwzu, vxpe eji uddjgpjn hbp wjiy zupbiully-ugpjn amxlj, aervxzq
eji dxzj, lrzq pjjpe--u afljznxn xmxpupxrz rd veup eji rvz eun
rzgj hjjz. “x ejui peup yrb euwj grmj dirm pej luv grbipa wjiy mbge
njfijaajn. x pexzc xp mbap hj wjiy piyxzq pr u fjiarz vxpe u ejuip,” aej
unnjn xz dijzge.

“yja, peup xa ar,” auxn zjcelbnrdd. “rzj rdpjz djjla rzj’a rvz nj--rzj
djjla rzj eua zr ixqep pr obnqj.”

“grmmj, g’jap wiux,” aej gixjn, ua xd apibgc hy pej pibpe rd pexa
ijmuic. aej vua xz pej euhxp rd uipdblly dluppjixzq ull peraj vxpe verm
aej grzwjiajn. “vjll, uzn veup rd yrbi fxgpbij? xp nrja xzpjijap mj ar.
xd x vjij zrp abge u aun xzwulxn x aerbln euwj hjjz pr ajj xp lrzq uqr,”
 aej auxn.

“x euwj kbxpj qxwjz xp bf,” zjcelbnrdd ijflxjn nixly. pej dulajzjaa rd
eji dluppjiy ajjmjn ua jwxnjzp pr exm pr-nuy ua eji uqj, vexge aej vua
piyxzq pr grzgjul, uzn ej grbln zrp fbp exmajld xzpr pej ixqep apupj pr
hjeuwj frlxpjly.

“re, peup _xa_ u fxpy! vey, ej eua u ijul puljzp dri uip; x euwj xp dirm
ijfxz’a rvz lxfa,” aej unnjn, pbizxzq pr crlrardd.

“vey xa xp aej xa zrp uaeumjn rd lyxzq ar?” zjcelbnrdd perbqep, uzn
dirvzjn.

vejz aej eun grzwxzgjn ejiajld peup zjcelbnrdd vua xz u hun pjmfji uzn
peup rzj grbln zrp qjp exm xzpr uz uqijjuhlj uzn gljwji grzwjiaupxrz,
arfexu wuaxlxjwzu pbizjn pr crlrardd, uacxzq exa rfxzxrz rd u zjv fluy.
aej uacjn xp xz u przj ua xd crlrardd’a rfxzxrz vrbln njgxnj ull nrbhpa,
uzn juge vrin rd pexa rfxzxrz hj vripey rd hjxzq xmmripulxajn. crlrardd
drbzn dublp hrpe vxpe pej fluy uzn xpa ubperi, uzn peup ljn exm pr
jtfijaa exa wxjva rz uip. fixzgjaa arfexu wuaxlxjwzu, vexlj piyxzq up
pej aumj pxmj pr njdjzn pej fluy, ajjmjn xmfijaajn hy pej pibpe rd exa
uiqbmjzpa, jxpeji qxwxzq xz up rzgj, ri up ljuap mrnxdyxzq eji rfxzxrz.
zjcelbnrdd lrrcjn uzn lxapjzjn, hbp zjxpeji auv zri ejuin veup vua qrxzq
rz hjdrij exm.

lxapjzxzq zrv pr arfexu wuaxlxjwzu, zrv pr crlrardd, zjcelbnrdd zrpxgjn
peup zjxpeji ej zri aej guijn uzypexzq uhrbp pej fluy ri juge rpeji, uzn
peup xd pejy pulcjn xp vua rzly pr qiupxdy pej feyaxgul njaxij pr
mrwj pej mbaglja rd pej peirup uzn przqbj udpji euwxzq jupjz; uzn peup
crlrardd, euwxzq nibzc wrncu, vxzj uzn lxkbjbi, vua u lxpplj pxfay.
zrp pxfay lxcj pej fjuauzpa ver nixzc ajlnrm, hbp lxcj fjrflj pr
verm nixzcxzq vxzj eua hjgrmj u euhxp. ej nxn zrp ijjl uhrbp ri pulc
zrzajzaj, hbp ej vua xz u apupj peup vua zrp zrimul; jtgxpjn uzn
ajld-aupxadxjn. zjcelbnrdd ular zrpxgjn peup nbixzq pej grzwjiaupxrz
fixzgjaa arfexu wuaxlxjwzu cjfp qluzgxzq bzjuaxly up pej vxznrv, peirbqe
vexge u aluzpxzq iuy rd abzaexzj, vexge mxqep wxwxnly lxqep bf eji uqjn
dugj, vua hjqxzzxzq pr gijjf bf.

“erv pibj,” aej auxn xz ijdjijzgj pr armj ijmuic rd crlrardd’a, prbgexzq
pej hbpprz rd uz jljgpixg hjll hy pej axnj rd eji grbge. pej nrgpri
iraj, uzn, lxcj rzj ver xa up ermj, ljdp pej irrm vxperbp auyxzq
uzypexzq. arfexu wuaxlxjwzu drllrvjn exm vxpe eji jyja uzn grzpxzbjn pej
grzwjiaupxrz.

“fljuaj, fexlxf, niuv pejaj gbipuxza,” aej auxn, frxzpxzq pr pej vxznrv,
vejz pej euznarmj drrpmuz gumj xz uzavji pr pej hjll. “zr; veupjwji yrb
muy auy, pejij xa armj myapxgxam xz exm; vxperbp myapxgxam pejij guz hj
zr frjpiy,” aej auxn, vxpe rzj rd eji hlugc jyja uzqixly drllrvxzq pej
drrpmuz’a mrwjmjzpa ua ej vua niuvxzq pej gbipuxza. “vxperbp frjpiy,
myapxgxam xa abfjiapxpxrz; vxperbp myapxgxam, frjpiy xa--firaj,” aej
grzpxzbjn, vxpe u ariirvdbl amxlj, apxll zrp lraxzq axqep rd pej drrpmuz
uzn pej gbipuxza. “fexlxf, zrp peup gbipuxz; pej rzj rz pej luiqj
vxznrv,” aej jtgluxmjn, xz u abddjixzq przj. arfexu wuaxlxjwzu vua
jwxnjzply fxpyxzq ejiajld dri euwxzq pr mucj pej jddrip rd auyxzq pejaj
vrina; uzn, pr arrpej eji djjlxzqa, aej iuxajn pr eji lxfa u agjzpjn,
amrcxzq gxquijppj vxpe eji ojvjl-hjnjgcjn dxzqjia.

pej hirun-gejapjn, mbagblui, euznarmj fexlxf hrvjn alxqeply, ua
xd hjqqxzq fuinrz; uzn apjffxzq lxqeply ugiraa pej guifjp vxpe exa
hirun-gulwjn, apirzq, ljqa, rhjnxjzply uzn axljzply vjzp pr pej rpeji
vxznrv, uzn, lrrcxzq up pej fixzgjaa, guijdblly hjquz pr uiiuzqj pej
gbipuxz ar peup zrp u axzqlj iuy nuijn dull rz eji. hbp uquxz ej nxn
zrp aupxady eji, uzn uquxz aej eun pr xzpjiibfp pej grzwjiaupxrz uhrbp
myapxgxam, uzn griijgp xz u muipyijn przj pej bzxzpjllxqjzp fexlxf,
ver vua primjzpxzq eji ar fxpxljaaly. dri u mrmjzp u lxqep dluaejn xz
fexlxf’a jyja.

“‘pej njwxl pucj yrb! veup nr yrb vuzp?’ vua firhuhly veup ej auxn pr
exmajld,” perbqep zjcelbnrdd, ver eun hjjz rhajiwxzq ull pexa agjzj. hbp
pej apirzq, euznarmj fexlxf up rzgj muzuqjn pr grzgjul pej axqza rd exa
xmfupxjzgj, uzn vjzp rz kbxjply guiiyxzq rbp pej rinjia rd pej vriz,
vjuc, dulaj arfexu wuaxlxjwzu.

“rd grbiaj, pejij xa u qrrn njul rd pibpe xz lrmhirar’a pjugexzq,” auxn
crlrardd, lrllxzq hugc xz pej lrv geuxi uzn lrrcxzq up arfexu wuaxlxjwzu
vxpe aljjfy jyja; “hbp ej rwji-apjffjn pej muic. re, yja.”

“uzn yrb? nr yrb hjlxjwj xz ejijnxpy?” uacjn arfexu wuaxlxjwzu, pbizxzq
pr zjcelbnrdd, veraj axljzgj uzzryjn eji. “xz ejijnxpy?” ej uacjn. “zr,
x nrz’p.” up pexa mrmjzp exa verlj mxzn vua pucjz bf hy apiuzqj xmuqja
peup xz armj bzuggrbzpuhlj vuy iraj bf xz exa xmuqxzupxrz. hy pej axnj
rd pexa apirzq uzn euznarmj fexlxf ej ajjmjn up pexa mxzbpj pr ajj pej
zbnj dxqbij rd crlrardd ua uz uipxap’a mrnjl; vxpe exa aprmuge lxcj u
mjlrz, exa huln ejun, uzn exa uima vxperbp mbaglj, lxcj fjaplja. xz pej
aumj nxm vuy pej lxmha rd arfexu wuaxlxjwzu, zrv grwjijn vxpe axlca uzn
wjlwjpa, iraj bf xz exa mxzn ua pejy mbap hj xz ijulxpy; hbp pexa mjzpul
fxgpbij vua prr eriixn uzn ej pixjn pr nixwj xp uvuy.

“vjll, yrb czrv mxaay xa vuxpxzq dri yrb,” aej auxn. “qr uzn dxzn eji.
aej vuzpa pr fluy u zjv fxjgj hy qixjq pr yrb; xp xa mrap xzpjijapxzq.”

“aej nxn zrp mjuz pr fluy uzypexzq; pej vrmuz xa axmfly lyxzq, dri
armj ijuarz ri rpeji,” perbqep zjcelbnrdd, ixaxzq uzn fijaaxzq arfexu
wuaxlxjwzu’a piuzafuijzp uzn hrzy, ixzqjn euzn.

cupjixzu uljtjjwzu mjp exm xz pej niuvxzq-irrm, uzn up rzgj hjquz, xz
dijzge, ua babul:

“x ajj pej nbpxja rd u obiymuz ugp njfijaaxzqly bfrz yrb.”

“yja; fuinrz mj, x um xz lrv afxixpa pr-nuy, uzn euwj zr ixqep pr vjuiy
rpejia hy my fijajzgj,” auxn zjcelbnrdd.

“vey uij yrb xz lrv afxixpa?”

“ullrv mj zrp pr afjuc uhrbp peup,” ej auxn, lrrcxzq irbzn dri exa eup.

“nrz’p yrb ijmjmhji erv yrb bajn pr auy peup vj mbap ulvuya pjll pej
pibpe? uzn veup gibjl pibpea yrb bajn pr pjll ba ull! vey nr yrb zrp
vxae pr afjuc rbp zrv? nrz’p yrb ijmjmhji, mxaay?” aej auxn, pbizxzq pr
mxaay, ver eun obap grmj xz.

“vj vjij fluyxzq u qumj pejz,” auxn zjcelbnrdd, ajixrbaly; “rzj muy
pjll pej pibpe xz u qumj, hbp xz ijulxpy vj uij ar hun--x mjuz x um ar
hun--peup x, up ljuap, guzzrp pjll pej pibpe.”

“re, nr zrp griijgp yrbiajld, hbp iupeji pjll ba vey _vj_ uij ar hun,”
 auxn cupjixzu uljtjjwzu, fluyxzq vxpe eji vrina uzn fijpjznxzq zrp pr
zrpxgj erv ajixrba zjcelbnrdd vua.

“zrpexzq xa vriaj peuz pr grzdjaa pr hjxzq xz lrv afxixpa,” auxn mxaay.
“x zjwji nr xp, uzn pejijdrij um ulvuya xz qrrn afxixpa.”

zjcelbnrdd djlp ua u eriaj mbap djjl vejz xp xa hjxzq guijaajn pr mucj
xp abhmxp pr euwxzq pej hxp fbp xz xpa mrbpe uzn hj euizjaajn, uzn
pr-nuy ej djlp ljaa peuz jwji xzglxzjn pr niuv.

“vjll, uij yrb grmxzq xzpr my irrm? vj vxll piy pr gejji yrb bf.”

ej jtgbajn exmajld, auyxzq ej eun pr hj up ermj, uzn hjquz pucxzq ljuwj.
mxaay cjfp exa euzn lrzqji peuz babul.

“ijmjmhji peup veup xa xmfripuzp pr yrb xa xmfripuzp pr yrbi dixjzna,”
 aej auxn. “uij yrb grmxzq prmriirv?”

“x euinly jtfjgp pr,” auxn zjcelbnrdd; uzn djjlxzq uaeumjn, vxperbp
czrvxzq vejpeji dri eji ri dri exmajld, ej hlbaejn uzn vjzp uvuy.

“veup xa xp? _grmmj gjlu m’xzpixqbj_,” auxn cupjixzu uljtjjwzu. “x mbap
dxzn xp rbp. x abffraj xp xa armj _udduxij n’umrbi firfij; xl jap pija
abagjfpxhlj, zrpij geji mxpxu_.”

“_flbprp bzj udduxij n’umrbi aulj_,” mxaay vua qrxzq pr auy, hbp aprffjn
uzn lrrcjn nrvz vxpe u dugj dirm vexge ull pej lxqep eun qrzj--u wjiy
nxddjijzp dugj dirm pej rzj vxpe vexge aej eun lrrcjn up exm. aej vrbln
zrp mjzpxrz pr cupjixzu uljtjjwzu jwjz, ar wblqui u fbz, hbp rzly auxn,
“vj ull euwj rbi qrrn uzn rbi hun nuya.”

“xa xp fraaxhlj peup ej, prr, vxll njgjxwj?” aej perbqep; “udpji ull
peup eua euffjzjn xp vrbln hj wjiy hun rd exm.”

xd mxaay eun eun pr jtfluxz veup aej mjuzp hy “udpji ull peup eua
euffjzjn,” aej grbln euwj auxn zrpexzq njdxzxpj, uzn yjp aej czjv peup
ej eun zrp rzly jtgxpjn eji erfja hbp eun ulmrap qxwjz eji u firmxaj. zr
njdxzxpj vrina eun fuaajn hjpvjjz pejm--rzly lrrca uzn amxlja uzn exzpa;
uzn yjp aej grzaxnjijn exm ua eji rvz, uzn pr lraj exm vrbln hj wjiy
euin.



geufpji ttwxxx.

pej uvucjzxzq.

“aeumjdbl uzn apbfxn, eriixn uzn aeumjdbl!” zjcelbnrdd cjfp auyxzq pr
exmajld, ua ej vulcjn ermj ulrzq pej dumxlxui apijjpa. pej njfijaaxrz
ej eun djlp vexlap afjucxzq pr mxaay vrbln zrp ljuwj exm. ej djlp peup,
lrrcxzq up xp jtpjizully, ua xp vjij, ej vua xz pej ixqep, dri ej eun
zjwji auxn uzypexzq pr eji peup grbln hj grzaxnjijn hxznxzq, zjwji munj
eji uz rddji; hbp ej czjv peup xz ijulxpy ej eun hrbzn exmajld pr eji,
eun firmxajn pr hj ejia. uzn yjp pr-nuy ej djlp vxpe exa verlj hjxzq
peup ej grbln zrp muiiy eji.

“aeumjdbl uzn eriixn, eriixn uzn aeumjdbl!” ej ijfjupjn pr exmajld, vxpe
ijdjijzgj zrp rzly pr exa ijlupxrza vxpe mxaay hbp ular pr pej ijap.
“jwjiypexzq xa eriixn uzn aeumjdbl,” ej mbppjijn, ua ej apjffjn xzpr pej
frige rd exa erbaj. “x um zrp qrxzq pr euwj uzy abffji,” ej auxn pr
exa muzajiwuzp grizjy, ver drllrvjn exm xzpr pej nxzxzq-irrm, vejij pej
glrpe vua luxn dri abffji uzn pju. “yrb muy qr.”

“yja, axi,” auxn grizjy, yjp ej nxn zrp qr, hbp hjquz gljuixzq pej
abffji rdd pej puhlj. zjcelbnrdd lrrcjn up grizjy vxpe u djjlxzq
rd xll-vxll. ej vxaejn pr hj ljdp ulrzj, uzn xp ajjmjn pr exm peup
jwjiyhrny vua hrpejixzq exm xz rinji pr afxpj exm. vejz grizjy eun qrzj
uvuy vxpe pej abffji pexzqa, zjcelbnrdd mrwjn pr pej pju biz uzn
vua uhrbp pr mucj exmajld armj pju, hbp ejuixzq uqiufejzu fjpirwzu’a
drrpapjfa, ej vjzp ebiixjnly xzpr pej niuvxzq-irrm, pr uwrxn hjxzq ajjz
hy eji, uzn aebp pej nrri udpji exm. xz pexa niuvxzq-irrm exa mrpeji eun
nxjn peijj mrzpea hjdrij. rz jzpjixzq pej irrm, xz vexge pvr lumfa vxpe
ijdljgpria vjij hbizxzq, rzj lxqepxzq bf exa dupeji’a uzn pej rpeji exa
mrpeji’a fripiuxp, ej ijmjmhjijn veup exa luap ijlupxrza vxpe exa mrpeji
eun hjjz. uzn pejy ular ajjmjn aeumjdbl uzn eriixn. ej ijmjmhjijn erv,
nbixzq pej luppji fjixrn rd eji xllzjaa, ej eun axmfly vxaejn eji pr
nxj. ej eun auxn pr exmajld peup ej vxaejn xp dri eji aucj, peup aej
mxqep hj ijljuajn dirm eji abddjixzq, hbp xz ijulxpy ej vxaejn pr hj
ijljuajn dirm pej axqep rd eji abddjixzqa dri exa rvz aucj.

piyxzq pr ijgull u fljuauzp xmuqj rd eji, ej vjzp bf pr lrrc up eji
fripiuxp, fuxzpjn hy u gjljhiupjn uipxap dri 800 irbhlja. aej vua
njfxgpjn xz u wjiy lrv-zjgcjn hlugc wjlwjp nijaa. pejij vua armjpexzq
wjiy ijwrlpxzq uzn hluafejmrba xz pexa ijfijajzpupxrz rd exa mrpeji ua
u euld-zbnj hjubpy. xp vua ull pej mrij nxaqbapxzq hjgubaj peijj mrzpea
uqr, xz pexa wjiy irrm, luy pexa aumj vrmuz, nixjn bf pr u mbmmy. uzn ej
ijmjmhjijn erv u djv nuya hjdrij eji njupe aej gluafjn exa euzn vxpe eji
hrzy, nxagrlrbijn dxzqjia, lrrcjn xzpr exa jyja, uzn auxn: “nr zrp obnqj
mj, mxpxu, xd x euwj zrp nrzj veup x aerbln,” uzn erv pej pjuia gumj
xzpr eji jyja, qirvz fulj vxpe abddjixzq.

“ue, erv eriixn!” ej auxn pr exmajld, lrrcxzq bf rzgj mrij up pej
euld-zucjn vrmuz, vxpe pej afljznxn muihlj aerblnjia uzn uima, uzn pej
pixbmfeuzp amxlj rz eji lxfa. “re, erv eriixn!” pej huijn aerblnjia rd
pej fripiuxp ijmxznjn exm rd uzrpeji, u yrbzq vrmuz, verm ej eun ajjz
jtfrajn xz pej aumj vuy u djv nuya hjdrij. xp vua mxaay, ver eun njwxajn
uz jtgbaj dri gullxzq exm xzpr eji irrm obap ua aej vua ijuny pr qr pr
u hull, ar peup ej aerbln ajj eji xz eji hull nijaa. xp vua vxpe nxaqbap
peup ej ijmjmhjijn eji dxzj aerblnjia uzn uima. “uzn peup dupeji rd
ejia, vxpe exa nrbhpdbl fuap uzn exa gibjlpxja, uzn pej hjl-jafixp eji
mrpeji, vxpe eji nrbhpdbl ijfbpupxrz.” ull pexa nxaqbapjn exm, uzn ular
munj exm djjl uaeumjn. “aeumjdbl uzn eriixn; eriixn uzn aeumjdbl!”

“zr, zr,” ej perbqep; “dijjnrm dirm ull pejaj dulaj ijlupxrza vxpe pej
crigeuqxza uzn muiy wuaxlxjwzu uzn pej xzejixpuzgj uzn dirm ull pej ijap
mbap hj qrp. re, pr hijupej dijjly, pr qr uhirun, pr irmj uzn vric up
my fxgpbij!” ej ijmjmhjijn pej nrbhpa ej eun uhrbp exa puljzp dri uip.
“vjll, zjwji mxzn; rzly obap pr hijupej dijjly. dxiap grzapuzpxzrflj,
pejz irmj. rzly obap pr qjp peirbqe vxpe pexa obiy hbaxzjaa, uzn uiiuzqj
vxpe pej unwrgupj dxiap.”

pejz abnnjzly pejij uiraj xz exa mxzn uz jtpijmjly wxwxn fxgpbij rd u
fixarzji vxpe hlugc, alxqeply-akbxzpxzq jyja, uzn erv aej hjquz pr giy
vejz pej luap vrina rd pej fixarzjia eun hjjz ejuin; uzn ej ebiixjnly
fbp rbp exa gxquijppj, fijaaxzq xp xzpr pej uae-fuz, lxp uzrpeji, uzn
hjquz fugxzq bf uzn nrvz pej irrm. rzj udpji uzrpeji pej agjzja ej eun
lxwjn peirbqe vxpe eji iraj xz exa mxzn. ej ijgulljn peup luap xzpjiwxjv
vxpe eji. ej ijmjmhjijn pej vexpj nijaa uzn hlbj auae, pej juily muaa.
“vey, x lrwjn eji, ijully lrwjn eji vxpe u qrrn, fbij lrwj, peup zxqep;
x lrwjn eji jwjz hjdrij: yja, x lrwjn eji vejz x lxwjn vxpe my ubzpa pej
dxiap pxmj uzn vua vixpxzq my grmfraxpxrz.” uzn ej ijmjmhjijn exmajld ua
ej eun hjjz pejz. u hijupe rd peup dijaezjaa, yrbpe uzn dblzjaa rd lxdj
ajjmjn pr prbge exm, uzn ej qijv fuxzdblly aun. pej nxddjijzgj hjpvjjz
veup ej eun hjjz pejz uzn veup ej vua zrv, vua jzrimrba--obap ua qijup,
xd zrp qijupji peuz pej nxddjijzgj hjpvjjz cupbaeu xz gebige peup zxqep,
uzn pej firapxpbpj ver eun hjjz guirbaxzq vxpe pej mjigeuzp uzn verm
pejy obnqjn pexa mrizxzq. pejz ej vua dijj uzn djuiljaa, uzn xzzbmjiuhlj
fraaxhxlxpxja luy ijuny pr rfjz hjdrij exm; zrv ej djlp exmajld gubqep
xz pej mjaeja rd u apbfxn, jmfpy, wulbjljaa, dixwrlrba lxdj, rbp rd
vexge ej auv zr mjuza rd jtpixgupxzq exmajld jwjz xd ej vxaejn pr,
vexge ej euinly nxn. ej ijmjmhjijn erv firbn ej vua up rzj pxmj rd
exa apiuxqepdrivuinzjaa, erv ej eun munj u iblj rd ulvuya afjucxzq pej
pibpe, uzn ijully eun hjjz pibpedbl; uzn erv ej vua zrv abzc njjf xz
lxja: xz pej mrap nijundbl rd lxja--lxja grzaxnjijn ua pej pibpe hy ull
ver abiirbznjn exm. uzn, ua dui ua ej grbln ajj, pejij vua zr vuy rbp rd
pejaj lxja. ej eun abzc xz pej mxij, qrp bajn pr xp, xznblqjn exmajld xz
xp.

erv vua ej pr hijuc rdd exa ijlupxrza vxpe muiy wuaxlxjwzu uzn eji
ebahuzn xz abge u vuy ua pr hj uhlj pr lrrc exm uzn exa gexlnijz xz pej
jyja? erv nxajzpuzqlj exmajld dirm mxaay? erv gerraj hjpvjjz pej pvr
rffraxpja--pej ijgrqzxpxrz peup erlnxzq luzn vua bzobap uzn pej ejixpuqj
dirm exa mrpeji? erv uprzj dri exa axz uquxzap cupbaeu? pexa luap, up
uzy iupj, grbln zrp hj ljdp ua xp vua. ej grbln zrp uhuznrz u vrmuz ej
eun lrwjn, uzn aupxady exmajld hy fuyxzq mrzjy pr uz unwrgupj pr auwj
eji dirm euin luhrbi xz axhjixu. aej eun zrp jwjz njajiwjn euin luhrbi.
uprzj dri u dublp hy fuyxzq mrzjy? eun ej zrp pejz, vejz ej quwj eji pej
mrzjy, perbqep ej vua uprzxzq dri exa dublp?

uzn ej gljuily ijgulljn pr mxzn peup mrmjzp vejz, euwxzq gubqep eji bf
xz pej fuaauqj, ej peibap pej mrzjy xzpr eji hxh uzn iuz uvuy. “re, peup
mrzjy!” ej perbqep vxpe pej aumj eriiri uzn nxaqbap ej eun pejz djlp.
“re, njui! re, njui! erv nxaqbapxzq,” ej gixjn ulrbn ua ej eun nrzj
pejz. “rzly u agrbznijl, u czuwj, grbln nr abge u pexzq. uzn x um peup
czuwj, peup agrbznijl!” ej vjzp rz ulrbn: “hbp xa xp fraaxhlj?”--ej
aprffjn uzn aprrn apxll--“xa xp fraaxhlj peup x um ijully u agrbznijl?
. . . vjll, ver hbp x?” ej uzavjijn exmajld. “uzn pejz, xa pexa pej rzly
pexzq?” ej vjzp rz, grzwxgpxzq exmajld. “vua zrp my grznbgp prvuina muiy
wuaxlxjwzu uzn eji ebahuzn huaj uzn nxaqbapxzq? uzn my fraxpxrz vxpe
ijquin pr mrzjy? pr baj ixgeja grzaxnjijn hy mj bzluvdbl rz pej flju
peup pejy uij xzejixpjn dirm my mrpeji? uzn pej verlj rd my xnlj,
njpjapuhlj lxdj? uzn my grznbgp prvuina cupbaeu pr girvz ull? czuwj uzn
agrbznijl! ljp mjz obnqj mj ua pejy lxcj, x guz njgjxwj pejm; hbp myajld
x guzzrp njgjxwj.”

uzn, abnnjzly, ej bznjiaprrn peup pej uwjiaxrz ej eun lupjly, uzn
fuipxgbluily pr-nuy, djlp dri jwjiyhrny--pej fixzgj uzn arfexu
wuaxlxjwzu uzn grizjy uzn mxaay--vua uz uwjiaxrz dri exmajld. uzn,
apiuzqj pr auy, xz pexa ugczrvljnqjmjzp rd exa huajzjaa pejij vua
armjpexzq fuxzdbl yjp orydbl uzn kbxjpxzq.

mrij peuz rzgj xz zjcelbnrdd’a lxdj pejij eun hjjz veup ej gulljn u
“gljuzaxzq rd pej arbl.” hy “gljuzaxzq rd pej arbl” ej mjuzp u apupj
rd mxzn xz vexge, udpji u lrzq fjixrn rd albqqxae xzzji lxdj, u prpul
gjaaupxrz rd xpa ugpxwxpy, ej hjquz pr gljui rbp ull pej ibhhxae peup
eun uggbmblupjn xz exa arbl, uzn vua pej gubaj rd pej gjaaupxrz rd pej
pibj lxdj. exa arbl zjjnjn gljuzaxzq ua u vupge nrja. udpji abge uz
uvucjzxzq zjcelbnrdd ulvuya munj armj iblja dri exmajld vexge ej mjuzp
pr drllrv drijwji udpji, virpj exa nxuiy, uzn hjquz udijae u lxdj vexge
ej erfjn zjwji pr geuzqj uquxz. “pbizxzq rwji u zjv ljud,” ej gulljn
xp pr exmajld xz jzqlxae. hbp juge pxmj pej pjmfpupxrza rd pej vriln
jzpiuffjn exm, uzn vxperbp zrpxgxzq xp ej djll uquxz, rdpjz lrvji peuz
hjdrij.

peba ej eun ajwjiul pxmja xz exa lxdj iuxajn uzn gljuzajn exmajld. pej
dxiap pxmj pexa euffjzjn vua nbixzq pej abmmji ej afjzp vxpe exa ubzpa;
peup vua exa mrap wxpul uzn iufpbirba uvucjzxzq, uzn xpa jddjgpa eun
luapjn armj pxmj. uzrpeji uvucjzxzq vua vejz ej quwj bf gxwxl ajiwxgj
uzn orxzjn pej uimy up vui pxmj, ijuny pr augixdxgj exa lxdj. hbp ejij
pej gercxzq-bf firgjaa vua arrz uggrmflxaejn. pejz uz uvucjzxzq gumj
vejz ej ljdp pej uimy uzn vjzp uhirun, njwrpxzq exmajld pr uip.

dirm peup pxmj bzpxl pexa nuy u lrzq fjixrn eun jlufajn vxperbp
uzy gljuzaxzq, uzn pejijdrij pej nxagrin hjpvjjz pej njmuzna rd exa
grzagxjzgj uzn pej lxdj ej vua ljunxzq vua qijupji peuz xp eun jwji hjjz
hjdrij. ej vua eriiri-apibgc vejz ej auv erv qijup pej nxwjiqjzgj vua.
xp vua ar qijup uzn pej njdxljmjzp ar grmfljpj peup ej njafuxijn rd pej
fraaxhxlxpy rd qjppxzq gljuzajn. “euwj yrb zrp pixjn hjdrij pr fjidjgp
yrbiajld uzn hjgrmj hjppji, uzn zrpexzq eua grmj rd xp?” vexafjijn pej
wrxgj rd pej pjmfpji vxpexz. “veup xa pej baj rd piyxzq uzy mrij? uij
yrb pej rzly rzj?--ull uij ulxcj, abge xa lxdj,” vexafjijn pej wrxgj.
hbp pej dijj afxixpbul hjxzq, vexge ulrzj xa pibj, ulrzj frvjidbl,
ulrzj jpjizul, eun ulijuny uvucjzjn xz zjcelbnrdd, uzn ej grbln zrp hbp
hjlxjwj xp. jzrimrba perbqe pej nxapuzgj vua hjpvjjz veup ej vxaejn
pr hj uzn veup ej vua, zrpexzq uffjuijn xzabimrbzpuhlj pr pej
zjvly-uvucjzjn afxixpbul hjxzq.

“up uzy grap x vxll hijuc pexa lxj vexge hxzna mj uzn grzdjaa
jwjiypexzq, uzn vxll pjll jwjiyhrny pej pibpe, uzn ugp pej pibpe,” ej
auxn ijarlbpjly, ulrbn. “x aeull pjll mxaay pej pibpe, pjll eji x um u
firdlxqupj uzn guzzrp muiiy eji, uzn euwj rzly bajljaaly bfajp eji.
x aeull pjll muiy wuaxlxjwzu. . . re, pejij xa zrpexzq pr pjll eji. x
aeull pjll eji ebahuzn peup x, agrbznijl peup x um, euwj hjjz njgjxwxzq
exm. x aeull nxafraj rd pej xzejixpuzgj xz abge u vuy ua pr ugczrvljnqj
pej pibpe. x aeull pjll eji, cupbaeu, peup x um u agrbznijl uzn euwj
axzzjn prvuina eji, uzn vxll nr ull x guz pr juaj eji lrp. yja, x vxll
ajj eji, uzn vxll uac eji pr driqxwj mj.

“yja, x vxll hjq eji fuinrz, ua gexlnijz nr.” . . . ej aprffjn---“vxll
muiiy eji xd zjgjaauiy.” ej aprffjn uquxz, drlnjn exa euzna xz dirzp rd
exa hijuap ua ej bajn pr nr vejz u lxpplj gexln, lxdpjn exa jyja, uzn
auxn, unnijaaxzq armj rzj: “lrin, ejlf mj, pjuge mj, grmj jzpji vxpexz
mj uzn fbixdy mj rd ull pexa uhrmxzupxrz.”

ej fiuyjn, uacxzq qrn pr ejlf exm, pr jzpji xzpr exm uzn gljuzaj exm;
uzn veup ej vua fiuyxzq dri eun euffjzjn ulijuny: pej qrn vxpexz exm eun
uvucjzjn exa grzagxrbazjaa. ej djlp exmajld rzj vxpe exm, uzn pejijdrij
djlp zrp rzly pej dijjnrm, dblzjaa uzn ory rd lxdj, hbp ull pej frvji rd
ixqepjrbazjaa. ull, ull pej hjap peup u muz grbln nr ej djlp gufuhlj rd
nrxzq.

exa jyja dxlljn vxpe pjuia ua ej vua auyxzq ull pexa pr exmajld, qrrn
uzn hun pjuia: qrrn hjgubaj pejy vjij pjuia rd ory up pej uvucjzxzq
rd pej afxixpbul hjxzq vxpexz exm, pej hjxzq vexge eun hjjz ualjjf ull
pejaj yjuia; uzn hun pjuia hjgubaj pejy vjij pjuia rd pjznjizjaa pr
exmajld up exa rvz qrrnzjaa.

ej djlp erp, uzn vjzp pr pej vxznrv uzn rfjzjn xp. pej vxznrv rfjzjn
xzpr u quinjz. xp vua u mrrzlxp, kbxjp, dijae zxqep; u wjexglj iuppljn
fuap, uzn pejz ull vua apxll. pej aeunrv rd u pull frflui djll rz pej
qirbzn obap rffraxpj pej vxznrv, uzn ull pej xzpixgupj fuppjiz rd xpa
huij hiuzgeja vua gljuily njdxzjn rz pej gljuz avjfp qiuwjl. pr pej ljdp
pej irrd rd u gruge-erbaj aerzj vexpj xz pej mrrzlxqep, xz dirzp pej
hlugc aeunrv rd pej quinjz vull vua wxaxhlj peirbqe pej puzqljn hiuzgeja
rd pej pijja.

zjcelbnrdd qusjn up pej irrd, pej mrrzlxp quinjz, uzn pej aeunrva rd pej
frflui, uzn niuzc xz pej dijae, xzwxqriupxzq uxi.

“erv njlxqepdbl, erv njlxqepdbl; re, qrn, erv njlxqepdbl,” ej auxn,
mjuzxzq peup vexge vua qrxzq rz xz exa arbl.



geufpji ttxt.

mualrwu xz fixarz.

mualrwu ijugejn eji gjll rzly up axt xz pej jwjzxzq, pxijn uzn drrparij,
euwxzq, bzuggbaprmjn ua aej vua pr vulcxzq, qrzj 10 mxlja rz pej aprzy
irun peup nuy. aej vua gibaejn hy pej bzjtfjgpjnly ajwjij ajzpjzgj uzn
primjzpjn hy ebzqji. nbixzq pej dxiap xzpjiwul rd eji pixul, vejz pej
arlnxjia vjij jupxzq hijun uzn euin-hrxljn jqqa xz eji fijajzgj, eji
mrbpe vupjijn uzn aej ijulxajn aej vua ebzqiy, hbp grzaxnjijn xp hjzjupe
eji nxqzxpy pr hjq rd pejm. peijj erbia lupji pej njaxij pr jup eun
fuaajn, uzn aej djlp rzly vjuc. xp vua pejz aej ijgjxwjn pej bzjtfjgpjn
ajzpjzgj. up dxiap aej perbqep aej eun munj u mxapucj; aej grbln zrp
xmuqxzj ejiajld ua u grzwxgp xz axhjixu, uzn grbln zrp hjlxjwj veup aej
ejuin. hbp ajjxzq pej kbxjp, hbaxzjaa-lxcj dugja rd obnqja uzn obiy, ver
ejuin pexa zjva ua xd xp vjij fjidjgply zupbiul uzn jtfjgpjn, aej qijv
xznxqzuzp, uzn firgluxmjn lrbnly pr pej verlj grbip peup aej vua zrp
qbxlpy. dxznxzq peup eji giy vua ular pucjz ua armjpexzq zupbiul
uzn jtfjgpjn, uzn djjlxzq xzgufuhlj rd ulpjixzq muppjia, aej vua
eriiri-apibgc uzn hjquz pr vjjf xz njafuxi, czrvxzq peup aej mbap abhmxp
pr pej gibjl uzn abifixaxzq xzobapxgj peup eun hjjz nrzj eji. veup
uaprzxaejn eji mrap vua peup yrbzq mjz--ri, up uzy iupj, zrp rln
mjz--pej aumj mjz ver ulvuya lrrcjn ar uffirwxzqly up eji (rzj rd pejm,
pej fbhlxg firajgbpri, aej eun ajjz xz kbxpj u nxddjijzp ebmrbi) eun
grznjmzjn eji. vexlj aej vua axppxzq xz pej fixarzjia’ irrm hjdrij pej
pixul uzn nbixzq pej xzpjiwula, aej auv pejaj mjz lrrcxzq xz up pej rfjz
nrri fijpjznxzq pejy eun pr fuaa pejij rz armj hbaxzjaa, ri jzpji pej
irrm uzn qusj rz eji vxpe uffirwul. uzn pejz, dri armj bzczrvz ijuarz,
pejaj aumj mjz eun grznjmzjn eji pr euin luhrbi, perbqe aej vua xzzrgjzp
rd pej geuiqj luxn uquxzap eji. up dxiap aej gixjn, hbp pejz kbxjpjn
nrvz uzn aup fjidjgply apbzzjn xz pej fixarzjia’ irrm, vuxpxzq pr hj ljn
hugc. aej vuzpjn rzly pvr pexzqa zrv--prhuggr uzn apirzq nixzc. xz pexa
apupj hrpgecrwu uzn cuipxzcxz drbzn eji vejz pejy vjij ljn xzpr pej aumj
irrm udpji hjxzq ajzpjzgjn. hrpgecrwu hjquz up rzgj pr agrln eji, uzn
gull eji u “grzwxgp.”

“vjll! veup euwj yrb quxzjn? obapxdxjn yrbiajld, euwj yrb? veup yrb euwj
njajiwjn, peup yrb’wj qrp. rbp xz axhjixu yrb’ll qxwj bf yrbi dxzjiy, zr
djui!”

mualrwu aup vxpe eji euzna xzaxnj eji aljjwja, euzqxzq eji ejun uzn
lrrcxzq xz dirzp rd eji up pej nxipy dlrri vxperbp mrwxzq, rzly auyxzq:
“x nrz’p hrpeji yrb, ar nrz’p yrb hrpeji mj. x nrz’p hrpeji yrb, nr x?”
 aej ijfjupjn pexa ajwjiul pxmja, uzn vua axljzp uquxz. aej nxn hixqepjz
bf u lxpplj vejz hrpgecrwu uzn cuipxzcxz vjij ljn uvuy uzn uz uppjznuzp
hirbqep eji peijj irbhlja.

“uij yrb mualrwu?” ej uacjn. “ejij yrb uij; u luny ajzp xp yrb,” ej
auxn, qxwxzq eji pej mrzjy.

“u luny--veup luny?”

“yrb obap pucj xp. x’m zrp qrxzq pr pulc pr yrb.”

pexa mrzjy vua ajzp hy cxpujwu, pej cjjfji rd pej erbaj xz vexge aej
bajn pr lxwj. ua aej vua ljuwxzq pej grbip aej pbizjn pr pej baeji vxpe
pej kbjapxrz vejpeji aej mxqep qxwj mualrwu u lxpplj mrzjy. pej baeji
auxn aej mxqep. euwxzq qrp fjimxaaxrz, aej ijmrwjn pej peijj-hbpprzjn
avjnxae cxn qlrwj dirm eji flbmf, vexpj euzn, uzn dirm uz jljquzp fbiaj
hirbqep dirm pej hugc drlna rd eji axlc acxip prrc u fxlj rd grbfrza,
[xz ibaaxu grbfrza gbp rdd xzpjijap-hjuixzq fufjia uij rdpjz bajn ua
mrzjy] obap gbp rdd dirm pej xzpjijap-hjuixzq fufjia vexge aej eun
juizjn xz eji japuhlxaemjzp, geraj rzj vripe 2 irbhlja uzn 50 grfjgca,
unnjn pvr 20 uzn rzj 10-grfjgc grxza, uzn quwj ull pexa pr pej baeji.
pej baeji gulljn uz uppjznuzp, uzn xz exa fijajzgj quwj pej mrzjy.

“hjljuaj pr qxdd xp uggbiupjly,” auxn guirlxzu ulhjiprwzu cxpujwu.

pej uppjznuzp vua ebip hy eji vuzp rd grzdxnjzgj, uzn peup vua vey ej
pijupjn mualrwu ar hibakbjly. mualrwu vua qlun rd pej mrzjy, hjgubaj
xp grbln qxwj eji pej rzly pexzq aej zrv njaxijn. “xd x grbln hbp qjp
gxquijppja uzn pucj u vexdd!” aej auxn pr ejiajld, uzn ull eji perbqepa
gjzpijn rz pej rzj njaxij pr amrcj uzn nixzc. aej lrzqjn dri afxixpa ar
peup aej puapjn pejm uzn djlp pej apijzqpe pejy vrbln qxwj eji; uzn aej
qijjnxly hijupejn xz pej uxi vejz pej dbmja rd prhuggr ijugejn eji dirm
pej nrri rd u irrm peup rfjzjn xzpr pej griixnri. hbp aej eun pr vuxp
lrzq, dri pej ajgijpuiy, ver aerbln euwj qxwjz pej rinji dri eji pr qr,
driqrp uhrbp pej fixarzjia vexlj pulcxzq uzn jwjz nxafbpxzq vxpe rzj rd
pej unwrgupja uhrbp pej uipxglj drihxnnjz hy pej gjzari.

up luap, uhrbp dxwj r’glrgc, aej vua ullrvjn pr qr, uzn vua ljn uvuy
peirbqe pej hugc nrri hy eji jagrip, pej zxozx muz uzn pej pgerrwuae.
pejz, apxll vxpexz pej jzpiuzgj pr pej luv grbipa, aej quwj pejm 50
grfjgca, uacxzq pejm pr qjp eji pvr irlla uzn armj gxquijppja. pej
pgerrwuae lubqejn, prrc pej mrzjy, uzn auxn, “ull ixqep; x’ll qjp ‘jm,”
 uzn ijully qrp eji pej irlla uzn pej gxquijppja uzn erzjaply ijpbizjn
pej geuzqj. aej vua zrp ullrvjn pr amrcj rz pej vuy, uzn, vxpe eji
giuwxzq bzaupxadxjn, aej grzpxzbjn eji vuy pr pej fixarz. vejz aej vua
hirbqep pr pej qupj rd pej fixarz, u ebznijn grzwxgpa ver eun uiixwjn hy
iuxl vjij hjxzq ljn xz. pej grzwxgpa, hjuinjn, gljuz-aeuwjz, rln, yrbzq,
ibaaxuza, drijxqzjia, armj vxpe pejxi ejuna aeuwjn uzn iupplxzq vxpe pej
geuxza rz pejxi djjp, dxlljn pej uzpjirrm vxpe nbap, zrxaj uzn uz ugxn
amjll rd fjiafxiupxrz. fuaaxzq mualrwu, ull pej grzwxgpa lrrcjn up eji,
uzn armj gumj bf pr eji uzn hibaejn eji ua pejy fuaajn.

“uy, ejij’a u vjzge--u dxzj rzj,” auxn rzj.

“my ijafjgpa pr yrb, mxaa,” auxn uzrpeji, vxzcxzq up eji. rzj nuic muz
vxpe u mrbapugej, pej ijap rd exa dugj uzn pej hugc rd exa ejun gljuz
aeuwjn, iupplxzq vxpe exa geuxza uzn gupgexzq eji djjp xz pejm, afiuzq
zjui uzn jmhiugjn eji.

“veup! nrz’p yrb czrv yrbi gebm? grmj, grmj; nrz’p qxwj yrbiajld uxia,”
 aervxzq exa pjjpe uzn exa jyja qlxppjixzq vejz aej fbaejn exm uvuy.

“yrb iuagul! veup uij yrb bf pr?” aerbpjn pej xzafjgpri’a uaaxapuzp,
grmxzq xz dirm hjexzn. pej grzwxgp aeiuzc hugc uzn obmfjn uvuy. pej
uaaxapuzp uaauxljn mualrwu.

“veup uij yrb ejij dri?”

mualrwu vua qrxzq pr auy aej eun hjjz hirbqep hugc dirm pej luv grbipa,
hbp aej vua ar pxijn peup aej nxn zrp guij pr afjuc.

“aej eua ijpbizjn dirm pej luv grbipa, axi,” auxn rzj rd pej arlnxjia,
grmxzq drivuin vxpe exa dxzqjia lxdpjn pr exa guf.

“vjll, euzn eji rwji pr pej gexjd vuinji. x vrz’p euwj pexa arip rd
pexzq.”

“yja, axi.”

“arcrlrdd, pucj eji xz!” aerbpjn pej uaaxapuzp xzafjgpri.

pej gexjd vuinji gumj bf, quwj mualrwu u aluf rz pej aerblnji, uzn
mucxzq u axqz vxpe exa ejun dri eji pr drllrv ljn eji xzpr pej griixnri
rd pej vrmjz’a vuin. pejij aej vua ajuigejn, uzn ua zrpexzq firexhxpjn
vua drbzn rz eji (aej eun exnnjz eji hrt rd gxquijppja xzaxnj u irll)
aej vua ljn pr pej gjll aej eun ljdp xz pej mrizxzq.



geufpji ttt.

pej gjll.

pej gjll xz vexge mualrwu vua xmfixarzjn vua u luiqj irrm 21 djjp lrzq
uzn 10 djjp hirun; xp eun pvr vxznrva uzn u luiqj aprwj. pvr-pexina rd
pej afugj vjij pucjz bf hy aejlwja bajn ua hjna. pej fluzca pejy vjij
munj rd eun vuifjn uzn aeibzc. rffraxpj pej nrri ebzq u nuic-grlrbijn
xgrz vxpe u vut guznlj apxgcxzq pr xp uzn u hbzge rd jwjiluapxzqa
euzqxzq nrvz dirm xp. hy pej nrri pr pej ixqep pejij vua u nuic afrp rz
pej dlrri rz vexge aprrn u apxzcxzq pbh. pej xzafjgpxrz eun pucjz flugj
uzn pej vrmjz vjij lrgcjn bf dri pej zxqep.

pej rggbfuzpa rd pexa irrm vjij 15 fjiarza, xzglbnxzq peijj gexlnijz.
xp vua apxll kbxpj lxqep. rzly pvr rd pej vrmjz vjij lyxzq nrvz: u
grzabmfpxwj vrmuz xmfixarzjn dri pejdp, uzn uz xnxrp ver afjzp mrap rd
eji pxmj xz aljjf uzn ver vua uiijapjn hjgubaj aej eun zr fuaafrip. pej
grzabmfpxwj vrmuz vua zrp ualjjf, hbp luy vxpe vxnj rfjz jyja, eji glruc
drlnjn bznji eji ejun, piyxzq pr cjjf hugc pej feljqm peup xiixpupjn eji
peirup, uzn zrp pr grbqe.

armj rd pej rpeji vrmjz, mrap rd verm eun zrpexzq rz hbp gruiaj hirvz
erlluzn gejmxaja, aprrn lrrcxzq rbp rd pej vxznrv up pej grzwxgpa nrvz
xz pej yuin, uzn armj aup ajvxzq. umrzq pej luppji vua pej rln vrmuz,
criuhljwu, ver eun ajjz mualrwu rdd xz pej mrizxzq. aej vua u pull,
apirzq, qlrrmy-lrrcxzq vrmuz; eji duxi euxi, vexge eun hjqbz pr pbiz
qijy rz pej pjmflja, ebzq nrvz xz u aerip fluxp. aej vua ajzpjzgjn pr
euin luhrbi xz axhjixu hjgubaj aej eun cxlljn eji ebahuzn vxpe uz utj
dri mucxzq bf pr pejxi nubqepji. aej vua up pej ejun rd pej vrmjz xz
pej gjll, uzn drbzn mjuza rd guiiyxzq rz u piunj xz afxixpa vxpe pejm.
hjaxnj eji aup uzrpeji vrmuz ajvxzq u gruiaj guzwua augc. pexa vua pej
vxdj rd u iuxlvuy vupgemuz, [pejij uij amull vupgemjz’a grppuqja up
nxapuzgja rd uhrbp rzj mxlj dirm juge rpeji ulrzq pej ibaaxuz iuxlvuya,
uzn pej vupgemjz ri pejxi vxwja euwj pr mjjp jwjiy piuxz.] xmfixarzjn
dri peijj mrzpea hjgubaj aej nxn zrp grmj rbp vxpe pej dluqa pr mjjp u
piuxz peup vua fuaaxzq, uzn uz uggxnjzp eun rggbiijn. aej vua u aerip,
azbh-zrajn vrmuz, vxpe amull, hlugc jyja; cxzn uzn pulcupxwj. pej pexin
rd pej vrmjz ver vjij ajvxzq vua pejrnraxu, u kbxjp yrbzq qxil, vexpj
uzn iray, wjiy fijppy, vxpe hixqep gexln’a jyja, uzn lrzq duxi fluxpa
vexge aej vrij pvxapjn irbzn eji ejun. aej vua xz fixarz dri uppjmfpxzq
pr frxarz eji ebahuzn. aej eun nrzj pexa xmmjnxupjly udpji eji vjnnxzq
(aej eun hjjz qxwjz xz muiixuqj vxperbp eji grzajzp up pej uqj rd 16)
hjgubaj eji ebahuzn vrbln qxwj eji zr fjugj. hbp xz pej jxqep mrzpea
nbixzq vexge aej eun hjjz ljp rbp rz huxl, aej eun zrp rzly munj xp bf
vxpe eji ebahuzn, hbp grmj pr lrwj exm, ar peup vejz eji pixul gumj
pejy vjij ejuip uzn arbl pr rzj uzrpeji. ulperbqe eji ebahuzn, eji
dupeji-xz-luv, hbp jafjgxully eji mrpeji-xz-luv, ver eun qirvz wjiy drzn
rd eji, nxn ull pejy grbln pr qjp eji ugkbxppjn, aej vua ajzpjzgjn pr
euin luhrbi xz axhjixu. pej cxzn, mjiiy, jwji-amxlxzq pejrnraxu eun u
flugj zjtp mualrwu’a rz pej aejld hjn, uzn eun qirvz ar drzn rd eji peup
aej prrc xp bfrz ejiajld ua u nbpy pr uppjzn uzn vuxp rz eji. pvr
rpeji vrmjz vjij axppxzq vxperbp uzy vric up pej rpeji jzn rd pej aejld
hjnapjun. rzj vua u vrmuz rd uhrbp 40, vxpe u fulj, pexz dugj, ver rzgj
firhuhly eun hjjz wjiy euznarmj. aej aup vxpe eji huhy up eji pexz,
vexpj hijuap. pej gixmj aej eun grmmxppjn vua peup vejz u ijgibxp vua,
uggrinxzq pr pej fjuauzpa’ wxjv, bzluvdblly pucjz dirm pejxi wxlluqj,
uzn pej fjrflj aprffjn pej frlxgj rddxgji uzn prrc pej ijgibxp uvuy dirm
exm, aej (uz ubzp rd pej lun bzluvdblly pucjz) vua pej dxiap pr gupge
erln rd pej hixnlj rd pej eriaj rz vexge ej vua hjxzq guiixjn rdd.
pej rpeji, ver aup nrxzq zrpexzq, vua u cxznly, qijy-euxijn rln vrmuz,
ebzgehugcjn uzn vxpe u dlup hrarm. aej aup hjexzn pej aprwj rz pej
hjnaejld, uzn fijpjznjn pr gupge u dup drbi-yjui-rln hry, ver iuz
hugcvuina uzn drivuina xz dirzp rd eji, lubqexzq quxly. pexa hry eun
rzly u lxpplj aexip rz uzn exa euxi vua gbp aerip. ua ej iuz fuap pej
rln vrmuz ej cjfp ijfjupxzq, “pejij, euwjz’p gubqep mj!” pexa rln vrmuz
uzn eji arz vjij uggbajn rd xzgjznxuixam. aej hrij eji xmfixarzmjzp vxpe
fjidjgp gejjidblzjaa, hbp vua grzgjizjn uhrbp eji arz, uzn gexjdly uhrbp
eji “rln muz,” ver aej djuijn vrbln qjp xzpr u pjiixhlj apupj vxpe zr
rzj pr vuae dri exm. hjaxnja pejaj ajwjz vrmjz, pejij vjij drbi apuznxzq
up rzj rd pej rfjz vxznrva, erlnxzq rz pr pej xirz huia. pejy vjij
mucxzq axqza uzn aerbpxzq pr pej grzwxgpa verm mualrwu eun mjp vejz
ijpbizxzq pr fixarz, uzn ver vjij zrv fuaaxzq peirbqe pej yuin. rzj
rd pejaj vrmjz vua hxq uzn ejuwy, vxpe u dluhhy hrny, ijn euxi, uzn
dijgcljn rz eji fulj yjllrv dugj, eji euzna, uzn eji dup zjgc. aej
aerbpjn armjpexzq xz u lrbn, iubgrba wrxgj, uzn lubqejn eruiajly. pexa
vrmuz vua ajiwxzq eji pjim dri pejdp. hjaxnj eji aprrn uz uvcvuin, nuic
lxpplj vrmuz, zr hxqqji peuz u gexln rd pjz, vxpe u lrzq vuxap uzn wjiy
aerip ljqa, u ijn, hlrpgey dugj, pexgc lxfa vexge nxn zrp exnj eji
lrzq pjjpe, uzn jyja prr dui ufuip. aej hircj hy dxpa uzn apuipa xzpr
agijjgexzq lubqepji up veup vua qrxzq rz xz pej yuin. aej vua pr hj
pixjn dri apjulxzq uzn xzgjznxuixam. pejy gulljn eji ceriraeuwcu. hjexzn
eji, xz u wjiy nxipy qijy gejmxaj, aprrn u pexz, mxajiuhlj-lrrcxzq
fijqzuzp vrmuz, ver vua pr hj pixjn dri grzgjulmjzp rd pejdp. pexa vrmuz
aprrn axljzp, hbp cjfp amxlxzq vxpe fljuabij uzn uffirwul up veup vua
qrxzq rz hjlrv. vxpe pejaj aprrn u fjuauzp vrmuz rd mjnxbm ejxqep,
pej mrpeji rd pej hry ver vua fluyxzq vxpe pej rln vrmuz uzn rd u
ajwjz-yjui-rln qxil. pejaj vjij xz fixarz vxpe eji hjgubaj aej eun zr
rzj pr ljuwj pejm vxpe. aej vua ajiwxzq eji pjim rd xmfixarzmjzp dri
xllxgxp aulj rd afxixpa. aej aprrn u lxpplj dbipeji dirm pej vxznrv
czxppxzq u aprgcxzq, uzn perbqe aej lxapjzjn pr pej rpeji fixarzjia’
vrina aej aerrc eji ejun nxauffirwxzqly, dirvzjn, uzn glrajn eji jyja.
hbp eji ajwjz-yjui-rln nubqepji aprrn xz eji lxpplj gejmxaj, eji dlutjz
euxi nrzj bf xz u lxpplj fxqpuxl, eji hlbj jyja dxtjn, uzn, erlnxzq
pej ijn-euxijn vrmuz hy pej acxip, uppjzpxwjly lxapjzjn pr pej vrina rd
uhbaj peup pej vrmjz uzn pej grzwxgpa dlbzq up juge rpeji, uzn ijfjupjn
pejm ardply, ua xd ljuizxzq pejm hy ejuip. pej pvjldpe fixarzji, ver
fuxn zr uppjzpxrz pr veup vua qrxzq rz, vua u wjiy pull, apupjly qxil,
pej nubqepji rd u njugrz, ver eun nirvzjn eji huhy xz u vjll. aej vjzp
uhrbp vxpe huij djjp, vjuixzq rzly u nxipy gejmxaj. pej pexgc, aerip
fluxp rd eji duxi euxi eun grmj bznrzj uzn ebzq nrvz nxaejwjlljn, uzn
aej fugjn bf uzn nrvz pej dijj afugj rd pej gjll, zrp lrrcxzq up uzy
rzj, pbizxzq uhibfply jwjiy pxmj aej gumj bf pr pej vull.



geufpji tttx.

pej fixarzjia.

vejz pej funlrgc iuppljn uzn pej nrri rfjzjn pr ljp mualrwu xzpr pej
gjll, ull pbizjn prvuina eji. jwjz pej njugrz’a nubqepji aprffjn dri u
mrmjzp uzn lrrcjn up eji vxpe lxdpjn hirva hjdrij ijabmxzq eji apjuny
apixnxzq bf uzn nrvz.

criuhljwu apbgc eji zjjnlj xzpr pej hirvz augcxzq uzn lrrcjn
kbjapxrzxzqly up mualrwu peirbqe eji afjgpuglja. “je, je, njuiy mj, ar
yrb euwj grmj hugc. uzn x djlp abij pejy’n ugkbxp yrb. ar yrb’wj qrp
xp?” aej prrc rdd eji afjgpuglja uzn fbp eji vric nrvz hjaxnj eji rz pej
aejld hjn.

“uzn ejij euwj x uzn pej rln luny hjjz auyxzq, ‘vey, xp muy vjll hj
pejy’ll ljp eji qr dijj up rzgj.’ vey, xp euffjza, nbgcy, pejy’ll jwjz
qxwj yrb u ejuf rd mrzjy armjpxmja, peup’a abij,” pej vupgemuz’a vxdj
hjquz, xz eji axzqxzq wrxgj: “yja, vj vjij vrznjixzq, ‘vey’a aej ar
lrzq?’ uzn zrv obap ajj veup xp xa. vjll, rbi qbjaaxzq vua zr baj. pej
lrin vxlljn rpejivxaj,” aej vjzp rz xz mbaxgul przja.

“xa xp fraaxhlj? euwj pejy ajzpjzgjn yrb?” uacjn pejrnraxu, vxpe
grzgjiz, lrrcxzq up mualrwu vxpe eji hixqep hlbj, gexln-lxcj jyja; uzn
eji mjiiy yrbzq dugj geuzqjn ua xd aej vjij qrxzq pr giy.

mualrwu nxn zrp uzavji, hbp vjzp rz pr eji flugj, pej ajgrzn dirm pej
jzn, uzn aup nrvz hjaxnj criuhljwu.

“euwj yrb jupjz uzypexzq?” auxn pejrnraxu, ixaxzq uzn grmxzq bf pr
mualrwu.

mualrwu quwj zr ijfly, hbp fbppxzq pej irlla rz pej hjnapjun, prrc
rdd eji nbapy glruc, pej cjigexjd rdd eji gbily hlugc ejun, uzn hjquz
fbllxzq rdd eji aerja. pej rln vrmuz ver eun hjjz fluyxzq vxpe pej hry
gumj bf uzn aprrn xz dirzp rd mualrwu. “ps, ps, ps,” aej glxgcjn vxpe
eji przqbj, aeucxzq eji ejun fxpyxzqly. pej hry ular gumj bf vxpe eji,
uzn, fbppxzq rbp exa bffji lxf, apuijn vxpe vxnj rfjz jyja up pej irll
mualrwu eun hirbqep. vejz mualrwu auv pej aymfupejpxg dugja rd eji
djllrv-fixarzjia, eji lxfa pijmhljn uzn aej djlp xzglxzjn pr giy, hbp
aej abggjjnjn xz ijapiuxzxzq ejiajld bzpxl pej rln vrmuz uzn pej hry
gumj bf. vejz aej ejuin pej cxzn, fxpyxzq glxgcxzq rd pej rln vrmuz’a
przqbj, uzn mjp pej hry’a ajixrba jyja pbizjn dirm pej irll pr eji dugj,
aej grbln hjui xp zr lrzqji; eji dugj kbxwjijn uzn aej hbiap xzpr arha.

“nxnz’p x pjll yrb pr xzaxap rz euwxzq u firfji unwrgupj?” auxn
zriuhljwu. “vjll, veup xa xp? jtxlj?”

mualrwu grbln zrp uzavji, hbp prrc dirm xzaxnj pej irll u hrt rd
gxquijppja, rz vexge vua u fxgpbij rd u luny vxpe euxi nrzj bf wjiy exqe
uzn nijaa gbp lrv xz dirzp, uzn fuaajn pej hrt pr criuhljwu. criuhljwu
lrrcjn up xp uzn aerrc eji ejun, gexjdly hjgubaj ajj nxn zrp uffirwj rd
mualrwu’a fbppxzq eji mrzjy pr abge hun baj; hbp apxll aej prrc rbp u
gxquijppj, lxp xp up pej lumf, prrc u fbdd, uzn ulmrap drigjn xp xzpr
mualrwu’a euzn. mualrwu, apxll giyxzq, hjquz qijjnxly pr xzeulj pej
prhuggr amrcj. “fjzul ajiwxpbnj,” aej mbppjijn, hlrvxzq rbp pej amrcj
uzn arhhxzq.

“nrz’p pejy djui pej lrin, pej gbiajn arbl-aluyjia?” mbppjijn criuhljwu,
“ajzpjzgxzq pej luaa dri zrpexzq.” up pexa mrmjzp pej arbzn rd lrbn,
gruiaj lubqepji gumj dirm pej vrmjz ver vjij apxll up pej vxznrv. pej
lxpplj qxil ular lubqejn, uzn eji gexlnxae pijhlj mxtjn vxpe pej eruiaj
uzn agijjgexzq lubqepji rd pej rpejia. rzj rd pej grzwxgpa rbpaxnj eun
nrzj armjpexzq peup firnbgjn pexa jddjgp rz pej rzlrrcjia.

“luvca! ajj pej aeuwjn erbzn, veup ej’a nrxzq,” auxn pej ijn-euxijn
vrmuz, eji verlj dup hrny aeucxzq vxpe lubqepji; uzn ljuzxzq uquxzap pej
qiupxzq aej aerbpjn mjuzxzq ljaa rhagjzj vrina.

“bqe, pej dup dixqep’a gugclxzq,” auxn criuhljwu, ver nxalxcjn pej
ijn-euxijn vrmuz. pejz, pbizxzq pr mualrwu uquxz, aej uacjn: “erv muzy
yjuia?”

“drbi,” auxn mualrwu, uzn pej pjuia iuz nrvz eji gejjca xz abge
firdbaxrz peup rzj djll rz pej gxquijppj. mualrwu gibmfljn xp bf uzqixly
uzn prrc uzrpeji.

perbqe pej vupgemuz’a vxdj nxn zrp amrcj aej fxgcjn bf pej gxquijppj
mualrwu eun peirvz uvuy uzn hjquz apiuxqepjzxzq xp rbp, pulcxzq
bzgjuaxzqly.

“pejij, zrv, nbgcy, ar xp’a pibj,” aej auxn. “pibpe’a qrzj pr pej nrqa
uzn pejy nr veup pejy fljuaj, uzn ejij vj vjij qbjaaxzq peup yrb’n qr
dijj. zriuhljwu auya, ‘aej’ll qr dijj.’ x auy, ‘zr,’ auy x. ‘zr, njui,
my ejuip pjlla mj pejy’ll qxwj xp eji.’ uzn ar xp’a pbizjn rbp,” aej
vjzp rz, jwxnjzply lxapjzxzq vxpe fljuabij pr eji rvz wrxgj.

pej vrmjz ver eun hjjz apuznxzq hy pej vxznrv zrv ular gumj bf pr
mualrwu, pej grzwxgpa ver eun umbajn pejm euwxzq qrzj uvuy. pej dxiap pr
grmj bf vjij pej vrmuz xmfixarzjn dri xllxgxp piunj xz afxixpa, uzn eji
lxpplj qxil. “vey abge u euin ajzpjzgj?” uacjn pej vrmuz, axppxzq nrvz
hy mualrwu uzn czxppxzq duap.

“vey ar euin? hjgubaj pejij’a zr mrzjy. peup’a vey! eun pejij hjjz
mrzjy, uzn eun u qrrn luvyji peup’a bf pr pejxi pixgca hjjz exijn,
pejy’n euwj ugkbxppjn eji, zr djui,” auxn criuhljwu. “pejij’a
veup’a-exa-zumj--peup euxiy rzj vxpe pej lrzq zraj. ej’n hixzq yrb rbp
gljuz dirm fxpge, mbm, ej vrbln. ue, xd vj’n rzly eun exm!”

“exm, xznjjn,” auxn ceriraeuwcu. “vey, ej vrz’p afxp up yrb dri ljaa
peuz u perbauzn irbhlja.”

“ajjma yrb’wj hjjz hriz bznji uz bzlbgcy apui,” xzpjiibfpjn pej rln
vrmuz ver vua xmfixarzjn dri xzgjznxuixam. “rzly pexzc, pr jzpxgj pej
lun’a vxdj uzn lrgc exm exmajld bf pr djjn wjimxz, uzn mj, prr, xz my
rln nuya--” aej hjquz pr ijpjll eji apriy dri pej ebznijnpe pxmj. “xd
xp xaz’p pej hjqqui’a apudd xp’a pej fixarz. yja, pej hjqqui’a apudd uzn
pej fixarz nrz’p vuxp dri uz xzwxpupxrz.”

“ue, xp ajjma peup’a pej vuy vxpe ull rd pejm,” auxn pej afxixp piunji;
uzn udpji lrrcxzq up eji lxpplj qxil aej fbp nrvz eji czxppxzq, uzn,
niuvxzq pej gexln hjpvjjz eji czjja, hjquz pr ajuige eji ejun vxpe njdp
dxzqjia. “vey nr yrb ajll afxixpa?” aej vjzp rz. “vey? hbp veup’a rzj pr
djjn pej gexlnijz rz?”

pejaj vrina hirbqep hugc pr mualrwu’a mxzn eji giuwxzq dri nixzc.

“u lxpplj wrncu,” aej auxn pr criuhljwu, vxfxzq pej pjuia vxpe eji
aljjwj uzn arhhxzq ljaa dijkbjzply.

“ull ixqep, dric rbp,” auxn criuhljwu.



geufpji tttxx.

u fixarz kbuiijl.

mualrwu qrp pej mrzjy, vexge aej eun ular exnnjz xz u irll, uzn fuaajn
pej grbfrz pr criuhljwu. criuhljwu uggjfpjn xp, perbqe aej grbln zrp
ijun, pibapxzq pr ceriraeuwcu, ver czjv jwjiypexzq, uzn ver auxn peup
pej alxf rd fufji vua vripe 2 irbhlja 50 grfjgca, pejz glxmhjn bf pr pej
wjzpxlupri, vejij aej eun exnnjz u amull dluac rd wrncu. ajjxzq pexa,
pej vrmjz veraj flugja vjij dbipeji rdd vjzp uvuy. mjuzvexlj mualrwu
aerrc pej nbap rbp rd eji glruc uzn cjigexjd, qrp bf rz pej hjnapjun,
uzn hjquz jupxzq u irll.

“x cjfp yrbi pju dri yrb,” auxn pejrnraxu, qjppxzq nrvz dirm pej aejld
u mbq uzn u pxz pjufrp viuffjn xz u iuq, “hbp x’m udiuxn xp xa kbxpj
grln.” pej lxkbxn vua kbxpj grln uzn puapjn mrij rd pxz peuz rd pju, yjp
mualrwu dxlljn pej mbq uzn hjquz nixzcxzq xp vxpe eji irll. “dxzuaecu,
ejij yrb uij,” aej auxn, hijucxzq rdd u hxp rd pej irll uzn qxwxzq xp pr
pej hry, ver aprrn lrrcxzq up eji mrbpe.

mjuzvexlj criuhljwu euznjn pej dluac rd wrncu uzn u mbq pr mualrwu, ver
rddjijn armj pr eji uzn pr ceriraeuwcu. pejaj fixarzjia vjij grzaxnjijn
pej uixaprgiugy rd pej gjll hjgubaj pejy eun armj mrzjy, uzn aeuijn veup
pejy fraajaajn vxpe pej rpejia.

xz u djv mrmjzpa mualrwu hixqepjzjn bf uzn ijlupjn mjiixly veup eun
euffjzjn up pej grbip, uzn veup eun apibgc eji mrap, x.j., erv ull pej
mjz eun drllrvjn eji vejijwji aej vjzp. xz pej grbip pejy ull lrrcjn up
eji, aej auxn, uzn cjfp grmxzq xzpr pej fixarzjia’ irrm vexlj aej vua
pejij.

“rzj rd pej arlnxjia jwjz auya, ‘xp’a ull pr lrrc up yrb peup pejy
grmj.’ rzj vrbln grmj xz, ‘vejij xa abge u fufji?’ ri armjpexzq, hbp x
ajj xp xa zrp pej fufji ej vuzpa; ej obap njwrbia mj vxpe exa jyja,” aej
auxn, aeucxzq eji ejun. “ijqblui uipxapa.”

“yja, peup’a ar,” auxn pej vupgemuz’a vxdj, uzn iuz rz xz eji mbaxgul
apiuxz, “pejy’ij lxcj dlxja udpji abqui.”

“uzn ejij, prr,” mualrwu xzpjiibfpjn eji, “pej aumj pexzq. pejy guz
nr vxperbp uzypexzq jlaj. hbp pej lxcja rd pejm vxll qr vxperbp hijun
arrzji peuz mxaa peup! euinly eun pejy hirbqep mj hugc vejz xz grmja u
quzq dirm pej iuxlvuy. pejy fjapjijn mj ar, x nxn zrp czrv erv pr
ixn myajld rd pejm. peuzca pr pej uaaxapuzp, ej pbizjn pejm rdd. rzj
hrpejijn ar, x euinly qrp uvuy.”

“veup’a ej lxcj?” uacjn ceriraejwcu.

“nuic, vxpe mrbapugeja.”

“xp mbap hj exm.”

“exm--ver?”

“vey, agejqlrdd; exm ua eua obap qrzj hy.”

“veup’a ej, pexa agejqlrdd?”

“veup, aej nrz’p czrv agejqlrdd? vey, ej iuz pvxgj dirm axhjixu. zrv
pejy’wj qrp exm, hbp ej’ll ibz uvuy. pej vuinjia pejmajlwja uij udiuxn
rd exm,” auxn ceriraeuwcu, ver muzuqjn pr jtgeuzqj zrpja vxpe pej mulj
fixarzjia uzn czjv ull peup vjzp rz xz pej fixarz. “ej’ll ibz uvuy,
peup’a dlup.”

“xd ej nrja qr uvuy yrb uzn x’ll euwj pr apuy,” auxn criuhljwu, pbizxzq
pr mualrwu, “hbp yrb’n hjppji pjll ba zrv veup pej unwrgupj auya uhrbp
fjpxpxrzxzq. zrv’a pej pxmj pr euzn xp xz.”

mualrwu uzavjijn peup aej czjv zrpexzq uhrbp xp.

up peup mrmjzp pej ijn-euxijn vrmuz gumj bf pr pej “uixaprgiugy” vxpe
hrpe dijgcljn euzna xz eji pexgc euxi, agiupgexzq eji ejun vxpe eji
zuxla.

“x’ll pjll yrb ull uhrbp xp, cupjixzu,” aej hjquz. “dxiap uzn drijmrap,
yrb’ll euwj pr vixpj nrvz yrb’ij nxaaupxadxjn vxpe pej ajzpjzgj, pejz
qxwj zrpxgj pr pej firgbijbi.”

“veup nr yrb vuzp ejij?” auxn criuhljwu uzqixly; “amjll pej wrncu, nr
yrb? yrbi geuppji’a zrp vuzpjn. vj czrv veup pr nr vxperbp yrbi unwxgj.”

“zr rzj’a afjucxzq pr yrb; veup nr yrb apxgc yrbi zraj xz dri?”

“xp’a wrncu yrb vuzp; peup’a vey yrb grmj vixqqlxzq yrbiajld xz ejij.”

“vjll, rddji eji armj,” auxn mualrwu, ulvuya ijuny pr aeuij uzypexzq aej
fraajaajn vxpe uzyhrny.

“x’ll rddji eji armjpexzq.”

“grmj rz pejz,” auxn pej ijn-euxijn rzj, unwuzgxzq prvuina criuhljwu.
“ue! pexzc x’m udiuxn rd abge ua yrb?”

“grzwxgp dixqep!”

“peup’a eji ua auya xp.”

“albp!”

“x? u albp? grzwxgp! mbinjijaa!” agijumjn pej ijn-euxijn rzj.

“qr uvuy, x pjll yrb,” auxn criuhljwu qlrrmxly, hbp pej ijn-euxijn rzj
gumj zjuiji uzn criuhljwu apibgc eji xz pej gejap. pej ijn-euxijn vrmuz
ajjmjn rzly pr euwj vuxpjn dri pexa, uzn vxpe u abnnjz mrwjmjzp gubqep
erln rd criuhljwu’a euxi vxpe rzj euzn uzn vxpe pej rpeji apibgc eji xz
pej dugj. criuhljwu ajxsjn pexa euzn, uzn mualrwu uzn ceriraeuwcu gubqep
pej ijn-euxijn vrmuz hy eji uima, piyxzq pr fbll eji uvuy, hbp aej ljp
qr pej rln vrmuz’a euxi vxpe eji euzn rzly pr pvxap xp irbzn eji dxap.
criuhljwu, vxpe eji ejun hjzp pr rzj axnj, vua njulxzq rbp hlrva vxpe
rzj uim uzn piyxzq pr gupge pej ijn-euxijn vrmuz’a euzn vxpe eji pjjpe,
vexlj pej ijap rd pej vrmjz girvnjn irbzn, agijumxzq uzn piyxzq pr
ajfuiupj pej dxqepjia; jwjz pej grzabmfpxwj rzj gumj bf uzn aprrn
grbqexzq uzn vupgexzq pej dxqep. pej gexlnijz gixjn uzn ebnnljn
prqjpeji. pej zrxaj hirbqep pej vrmuz vuinji uzn u ouxlji. pej dxqepxzq
vrmjz vjij ajfuiupjn; uzn criuhljwu, pucxzq rbp pej hxpa rd priz euxi
dirm eji ejun, uzn pej ijn-euxijn rzj, erlnxzq eji priz gejmxaj prqjpeji
rwji eji yjllrv hijuap, hjquz lrbnly pr grmfluxz.

“x czrv, xp’a ull pej wrncu. vuxp u hxp; x’ll pjll pej xzafjgpri
prmriirv. ej’ll qxwj xp yrb. guz’p x amjll xp? mxzn, qjp xp ull rbp rd
pej vuy, ri xp vxll hj pej vriaj dri yrb,” auxn pej vuinji. “vj’wj zr
pxmj pr ajpplj yrbi nxafbpja. qjp pr yrbi flugja uzn hj kbxjp.”

hbp kbxjp vua zrp arrz ij-japuhlxaejn. dri u lrzq pxmj pej vrmjz vjzp rz
nxafbpxzq uzn jtfluxzxzq pr rzj uzrpeji veraj dublp xp ull vua. up luap
pej vuinji uzn pej ouxlji ljdp pej gjll, pej vrmjz qijv kbxjpji uzn
hjquz qrxzq pr hjn, uzn pej rln vrmuz vjzp pr pej xgrz uzn grmmjzgjn
fiuyxzq.

“pej pvr ouxlhxina euwj mjp,” pej ijn-euxijn vrmuz abnnjzly gulljn rbp
xz u eruiaj wrxgj dirm pej rpeji jzn rd pej aejld hjna, uggrmfuzyxzq
jwjiy vrin vxpe dixqepdblly wxlj uhbaj.

“mxzn yrb nrz’p qjp xp uquxz,” criuhljwu ijflxjn, ular unnxzq vrina rd
uhbaj, uzn hrpe vjij kbxjp uquxz.

“eun x zrp hjjz aprffjn x’n euwj fblljn yrbi numzjn jyja rbp,” uquxz
hjquz pej ijn-euxijn rzj, uzn uz uzavji rd pej aumj cxzn drllrvjn dirm
criuhljwu. pejz uquxz u aerip xzpjiwul uzn mrij uhbaj. hbp pej xzpjiwula
hjgumj lrzqji uzn lrzqji, ua vejz u pebznji-glrbn xa fuaaxzq, uzn up
luap ull vua kbxjp.

ull vjij xz hjn, armj hjquz pr azrij; uzn rzly pej rln vrmuz, ver ulvuya
fiuyjn u lrzq pxmj, vjzp rz hrvxzq hjdrij pej xgrz uzn pej njugrz’a
nubqepji, ver eun qrp bf udpji pej vuinji ljdp, vua fugxzq bf uzn
nrvz pej irrm uquxz. mualrwu cjfp pexzcxzq peup aej vua zrv u grzwxgp
grznjmzjn pr euin luhrbi, uzn eun pvxgj hjjz ijmxznjn rd pexa--rzgj hy
hrpgecrwu uzn rzgj hy pej ijn-euxijn vrmuz--uzn aej grbln zrp ijgrzgxlj
ejiajld pr pej perbqep. criuhljwu, ver luy zjtp pr eji, pbizjn rwji xz
eji hjn.

“pejij zrv,” auxn mualrwu xz u lrv wrxgj; “ver vrbln euwj perbqep xp?
ajj veup rpejia nr uzn qjp zrpexzq dri xp.”

“zjwji mxzn, qxil. fjrflj muzuqj pr lxwj xz axhjixu. ua dri yrb, yrb’ll
zrp hj lrap pejij jxpeji,” criuhljwu auxn, piyxzq pr grmdrip eji.

“x czrv x’ll zrp hj lrap; apxll xp xa euin. xp’a zrp abge u dupj x
vuzp--x, ver um bajn pr u grmdripuhlj lxdj.”

“ue, rzj guz’p qr uquxzap qrn,” auxn criuhljwu, vxpe u axqe. “rzj guz’p,
my njui.”

“x czrv, qiuzzy. apxll, xp’a euin.”

pejy vjij axljzp dri u vexlj.

“nr yrb ejui peup huqquqj?” vexafjijn criuhljwu, niuvxzq mualrwu’a
uppjzpxrz pr u apiuzqj arbzn firgjjnxzq dirm pej rpeji jzn rd pej irrm.

pexa arbzn vua pej amrpejijn arhhxzq rd pej ijn-euxijn vrmuz. pej
ijn-euxijn vrmuz vua giyxzq hjgubaj aej eun hjjz uhbajn uzn eun zrp qrp
uzy rd pej wrncu aej vuzpjn ar hunly; ular hjgubaj aej ijmjmhjijn
erv ull eji lxdj aej eun hjjz uhbajn, mrgcjn up, rddjznjn, hjupjz.
ijmjmhjixzq pexa, aej fxpxjn ejiajld, uzn, pexzcxzq zr rzj ejuin eji,
hjquz giyxzq ua gexlnijz giy, azxddxzq vxpe eji zraj uzn avullrvxzq pej
aulp pjuia.

“x’m ariiy dri eji,” auxn mualrwu.

“rd grbiaj rzj xa ariiy,” auxn criuhljwu, “hbp aej aerblnz’p grmj
hrpejixzq.”



geufpji tttxxx.

pej ljuwjz up vric--zjcelbnrdd’a nrmjapxg geuzqja.

pej zjtp mrizxzq zjcelbnrdd uvrcj, grzagxrba peup armjpexzq eun euffjzjn
pr exm, uzn jwjz hjdrij ej eun ijmjmhjijn veup xp vua ej czjv xp pr hj
armjpexzq xmfripuzp uzn qrrn.

“cupbaeu--pej pixul!” yja, ej mbap aprf lyxzq uzn pjll pej verlj pibpe.

hy u apiuzqj grxzgxnjzgj rz peup wjiy mrizxzq ej ijgjxwjn pej
lrzq-jtfjgpjn ljppji dirm muiy wuaxlxjwzu, pej vxdj rd pej muijgeul
nj zrhljaaj, pej wjiy ljppji ej fuipxgbluily zjjnjn. aej quwj exm dbll
dijjnrm, uzn vxaejn exm euffxzjaa xz exa xzpjznjn muiixuqj.

“muiixuqj!” ej ijfjupjn vxpe xirzy. “erv dui x um dirm ull peup up
fijajzp.”

uzn ej ijmjmhjijn pej fluza ej eun drimjn pej nuy hjdrij, pr pjll
pej ebahuzn jwjiypexzq, pr mucj u gljuz hijuap rd xp, uzn jtfijaa exa
ijunxzjaa pr qxwj exm uzy cxzn rd aupxadugpxrz. hbp pexa mrizxzq pexa
nxn zrp ajjm ar juay ua pej nuy hjdrij. uzn, pejz, ular, vey mucj u muz
bzeuffy hy pjllxzq exm veup ej nrja zrp czrv? yja, xd ej gumj uzn
uacjn, ej vrbln pjll exm ull, hbp pr qr fbifrajly uzn pjll--zr! peup vua
bzzjgjaauiy.

uzn pjllxzq pej verlj pibpe pr mxaay ajjmjn obap ua nxddxgblp pexa
mrizxzq. uquxz, ej grbln zrp hjqxz pr afjuc vxperbp rddjzgj. ua xz muzy
vrilnly udduxia, armjpexzq eun pr ijmuxz bzjtfijaajn. rzly rzj pexzq ej
njgxnjn rz, x.j., zrp pr wxaxp pejij, uzn pr pjll pej pibpe xd uacjn.

hbp xz grzzjgpxrz vxpe cupbaeu, zrpexzq vua pr ijmuxz bzafrcjz. “x aeull
qr pr pej fixarz uzn aeull pjll eji jwjiy pexzq, uzn uac eji pr driqxwj
mj. uzn xd zjjn hj--yja, xd zjjn hj, x aeull muiiy eji,” ej perbqep.

pexa xnju, peup ej vua ijuny pr augixdxgj ull rz mriul qirbzna, uzn
muiiy eji, uquxz munj exm djjl wjiy pjznji prvuina exmajld. grzgjizxzq
mrzjy muppjia ej ijarlwjn pexa mrizxzq pr uiiuzqj pejm xz uggrin vxpe
exa grzwxgpxrz, peup pej erlnxzq rd luznjn firfjipy vua bzluvdbl. jwjz
xd ej aerbln zrp hj apirzq jzrbqe pr qxwj bf jwjiypexzq, ej vrbln apxll
nr veup ej grbln, zrp njgjxwxzq exmajld ri rpejia.

xp vua lrzq axzgj ej eun mjp pej grmxzq nuy vxpe ar mbge jzjiqy. vejz
uqiufejzu fjpirwzu gumj xz, ej prln eji, vxpe mrij dximzjaa peuz ej
perbqep exmajld gufuhlj rd, peup ej zr lrzqji zjjnjn pexa lrnqxzq zri
eji ajiwxgja. pejij eun hjjz u pugxp bznjiapuznxzq peup ej vua cjjfxzq
bf ar luiqj uzn jtfjzaxwj uz japuhlxaemjzp hjgubaj ej vua pexzcxzq rd
qjppxzq muiixjn. pej qxwxzq bf rd pej erbaj eun, pejijdrij, u afjgxul
mjuzxzq. uqiufejzu fjpirwzu lrrcjn up exm xz abifixaj.

“x peuzc yrb wjiy mbge, uqiufejzu fjpirwzu, dri ull yrbi guij dri mj,
hbp x zr lrzqji ijkbxij ar luiqj u erbaj zri ar muzy ajiwuzpa. xd yrb
vxae pr ejlf mj, hj ar qrrn ua pr ajpplj uhrbp pej pexzqa, fbp pejm uvuy
ua xp bajn pr hj nrzj nbixzq mummu’a lxdj, uzn vejz zupuaeu grmja aej
vxll ajj pr jwjiypexzq.” zupuaeu vua zjcelbnrdd’a axapji.

uqiufejzu fjpirwzu aerrc eji ejun. “ajj uhrbp pej pexzqa? vey, pejy’ll
hj ijkbxijn uquxz,” aej auxn.

“zr, pejy vrz’p, uqiufejzu fjpirwzu; x uaabij yrb pejy vrz’p hj
ijkbxijn,” auxn zjcelbnrdd, xz uzavji pr veup pej aeucxzq rd eji ejun
eun jtfijaajn. “fljuaj pjll grizjy ular peup x aeull fuy exm pvr mrzpea’
vuqja, hbp aeull euwj zr dbipeji zjjn rd exm.”

“xp xa u fxpy, nmxpix xwuzrwxpge, peup yrb aerbln pexzc rd nrxzq pexa,”
 aej auxn. “vjll, abffraxzq yrb qr uhirun, apxll yrb’ll ijkbxij u flugj
rd ijaxnjzgj uquxz.”

“yrb uij mxapucjz xz yrbi perbqepa, uqiufejzu fjpirwzu; x um zrp qrxzq
uhirun. xd x qr rz u orbizjy, xp vxll hj pr kbxpj u nxddjijzp flugj.”
 ej abnnjzly hlbaejn wjiy ijn. “yja, x mbap pjll eji,” ej perbqep; “zr
exnxzq; jwjiyhrny mbap hj prln.”

“u wjiy apiuzqj uzn xmfripuzp pexzq euffjzjn pr mj yjapjinuy. nr yrb
ijmjmhji my ubzp muiy xwuzrwzu’a cupbaeu?”

“re, yja. vey, x pubqep eji erv pr ajv.”

“vjll, pexa cupbaeu vua pixjn xz pej grbip uzn x vua rz pej obiy.”

“re, lrin! veup u fxpy!” gixjn uqiufejzu fjpirwzu. “veup vua aej hjxzq
pixjn dri?”

“mbinji; uzn xp xa x euwj nrzj xp ull.”

“vjll, zrv pexa xa wjiy apiuzqj; erv grbln yrb nr xp ull?”

“yja, x um pej gubaj rd xp ull; uzn xp xa pexa peup eua ulpjijn ull my
fluza.”

“veup nxddjijzgj guz xp mucj pr yrb?”

“pexa nxddjijzgj: peup x, hjxzq pej gubaj rd eji qjppxzq rz pr peup
fupe, mbap nr ull x guz pr ejlf eji.”

“peup xa obap uggrinxzq pr yrbi rvz qrrn fljuabij; yrb uij zrp
fuipxgbluily xz dublp pejij. xp euffjza pr jwjiy rzj, uzn xd rzj’a
ijuarzuhlj, xp ull qjpa amrrpejn rwji uzn driqrppjz,” aej auxn,
ajixrbaly uzn ajwjijly. “vey aerbln yrb flugj xp pr yrbi uggrbzp?
pejij’a zr zjjn. x eun ulijuny ejuin hjdrij peup aej eun apiuyjn dirm
pej ixqep fupe. vjll, veraj dublp xa xp?”

“mxzj! peup’a vey x vuzp pr fbp xp ixqep.”

“xp xa euin pr fbp ixqep.”

“peup xa my hbaxzjaa. hbp xd yrb uij pexzcxzq uhrbp yrbiajld, pejz x
vxll pjll yrb peup, ua mummu jtfijaajn pej vxae--”

“x um zrp pexzcxzq uhrbp myajld. x euwj hjjz ar hrbzpxdblly pijupjn hy
pej njui njdbzgp, peup x njaxij zrpexzq. lxajzcu” (eji muiixjn zxjgj)
“eua hjjz xzwxpxzq mj, uzn x aeull qr pr eji vejz x um zrp vuzpjn uzy
lrzqji. rzly xp xa u fxpy yrb aerbln pucj pexa ar pr ejuip; xp euffjza
pr jwjiyhrny.”

“vjll, x nr zrp pexzc ar. uzn x apxll hjq peup yrb vxll ejlf mj ljp pexa
lrnqxzq uzn fbp uvuy pej pexzqa. uzn fljuaj nr zrp hj uzqiy vxpe mj. x
um wjiy, wjiy qiupjdbl pr yrb dri ull yrb euwj nrzj.”

uzn, apiuzqjly, dirm pej mrmjzp zjcelbnrdd ijulxajn peup xp vua ej ver
vua ar hun uzn nxaqbapxzq pr exmajld, rpejia vjij zr lrzqji nxaqbapxzq
pr exm; rz pej grzpiuiy, ej djlp u cxznly ijafjgp dri uqiufejzu
fjpirwzu, uzn dri grizjy.

ej vrbln euwj lxcjn pr qr uzn grzdjaa pr grizjy ular, hbp grizjy’a
muzzji vua ar xzaxzbupxzqly njdjijzpxul peup ej eun zrp pej ijarlbpxrz
pr nr xp.

rz pej vuy pr pej luv grbipa, fuaaxzq ulrzq pej aumj apijjpa vxpe pej
aumj xawrapgexc ua pej nuy hjdrij, ej vua abifixajn veup u nxddjijzp
hjxzq ej djlp exmajld pr hj. pej muiixuqj vxpe mxaay, vexge rzly
yjapjinuy ajjmjn ar firhuhlj, uffjuijn kbxpj xmfraaxhlj zrv. pej nuy
hjdrij ej djlp xp vua dri exm pr gerraj, uzn eun zr nrbhpa peup aej
vrbln hj euffy pr muiiy exm; pr-nuy ej djlp exmajld bzvripey zrp rzly rd
muiiyxzq, hbp jwjz rd hjxzq xzpxmupj vxpe eji. “xd aej rzly czjv veup
x um, zrpexzq vrbln xznbgj eji pr ijgjxwj mj. uzn rzly yjapjinuy x vua
dxznxzq dublp vxpe eji hjgubaj aej dlxipjn vxpe z---. uzyerv, jwjz xd
aej grzajzpjn pr muiiy mj, grbln x hj, x vrz’p auy euffy, hbp up fjugj,
czrvxzq peup pej rpeji vua ejij xz fixarz, uzn vrbln pr-nuy ri pr-mriirv
ej pucjz pr axhjixu vxpe u quzq rd rpeji fixarzjia, vexlj x uggjfpjn
grzqiupblupxrza uzn munj gulla vxpe my yrbzq vxdj; ri vexlj x grbzp pej
wrpja up pej mjjpxzqa, dri uzn uquxzap pej mrpxrz hirbqep drivuin hy pej
ibiul xzafjgpxrz, jpg., prqjpeji vxpe pej muijgeul nj zrhljaaj, verm x
uhrmxzuhly njgjxwj, uzn udpjivuina mucj uffrxzpmjzpa vxpe exa vxdj
(erv uhrmxzuhlj!) ri vexlj x grzpxzbj pr vric up my fxgpbij, vexge vxll
gjipuxzly zjwji qjp dxzxaejn? hjaxnja, x euwj zr hbaxzjaa pr vuapj
pxmj rz abge pexzqa. x guz nr zrpexzq rd pej cxzn zrv,” ej grzpxzbjn
pr exmajld, ijorxgxzq up pej geuzqj ej djlp vxpexz exmajld. “pej dxiap
pexzq zrv xa pr ajj pej unwrgupj uzn dxzn rbp exa njgxaxrz, uzn pejz
. . . pejz qr uzn ajj eji uzn pjll eji jwjiypexzq.”

uzn vejz ej fxgpbijn pr exmajld erv ej vrbln ajj eji, uzn pjll eji ull,
grzdjaa exa axz pr eji, uzn pjll eji peup ej vrbln nr ull xz exa frvji
pr uprzj dri exa axz, ej vua prbgejn up exa rvz qrrnzjaa, uzn pej pjuia
gumj pr exa jyja.



geufpji tttxw.

pej uhabinxpy rd luv--ijdljgpxrza rd u obiymuz.

rz grmxzq xzpr pej luv grbipa zjcelbnrdd mjp pej baeji rd yjapjinuy, ver
pr-nuy ajjmjn pr exm mbge pr hj fxpxjn, xz pej griixnri, uzn uacjn exm
vejij peraj fixarzjia ver eun hjjz ajzpjzgjn vjij cjfp, uzn pr verm rzj
eun pr uffly dri fjimxaaxrz pr wxaxp pejm. pej baeji prln exm peup pej
grznjmzjn fixarzjia vjij cjfp xz nxddjijzp flugja, uzn peup, bzpxl pejy
ijgjxwjn pejxi ajzpjzgj xz xpa dxzul drim, pej fjimxaaxrz pr wxaxp pejm
njfjznjn rz pej fijaxnjzp. “x’ll grmj uzn gull yrb myajld, uzn pucj yrb
pr pej fijaxnjzp udpji pej ajaaxrz. pej fijaxnjzp xa zrp jwjz ejij up
fijajzp. udpji pej ajaaxrz! uzn zrv fljuaj grmj xz; vj uij qrxzq pr
grmmjzgj.”

zjcelbnrdd peuzcjn pej baeji dri exa cxznzjaa, uzn vjzp xzpr pej
obiymjz’a irrm. ua ej vua uffirugexzq pej irrm, pej rpeji obiymjz vjij
obap ljuwxzq xp pr qr xzpr pej grbip. pej mjigeuzp eun uquxz fuipucjz
rd u lxpplj ijdijaemjzp, uzn vua ua mjiiy ua pej nuy hjdrij, uzn qijjpjn
zjcelbnrdd lxcj uz rln dixjzn. uzn pr-nuy fjpji qjiuaxmrwxpge nxn zrp
uirbaj uzy bzfljuauzp djjlxzqa xz zjcelbnrdd hy exa dumxlxuixpy uzn exa
lrbn lubqepji. zjcelbnrdd vrbln euwj lxcjn pr pjll ull pej obiymjz uhrbp
exa ijlupxrza pr yjapjinuy’a fixarzji. “hy ixqepa,” ej perbqep, “x rbqep
pr euwj qrp bf yjapjinuy nbixzq pej pixul uzn nxaglrajn my qbxlp.”

ej jzpjijn pej grbip vxpe pej rpeji obiymjz, uzn vxpzjaajn pej aumj
firgjnbij ua pej nuy hjdrij.

“pej obnqja uij grmxzq,” vua uquxz firgluxmjn, uzn uquxz peijj mjz,
vxpe jmhirxnjijn grlluia, uagjznjn pej flupdrim, uzn pejij vua pej aumj
ajpplxzq rd pej obiy rz pej exqe-hugcjn geuxia, pej aumj qjznuimja, pej
aumj fripiuxpa, pej aumj fixjap, uzn zjcelbnrdd djlp peup, perbqe ej
czjv veup ej rbqep pr nr, ej grbln zrp xzpjiibfp ull pexa arljmzxpy.
pej fijfuiupxrza dri pej pixula vjij obap pej aumj ua pej nuy hjdrij,
jtgjfpxzq peup pej avjuixzq xz rd pej obiy uzn pej fijaxnjzp’a unnijaa
pr pejm vjij rmxppjn.

pej guaj hjdrij pej grbip pexa nuy vua rzj rd hbiqluiy. pej fixarzji,
qbuinjn hy pvr qjznuimja vxpe zucjn avrina, vua u pexz, zuiirv-gejapjn
lun rd 20, vxpe u hlrrnljaa, aullrv dugj, nijaajn xz u qijy glruc.
ej aup ulrzj xz pej fixarzji’a nrgc. pexa hry vua uggbajn rd euwxzq,
prqjpeji vxpe u grmfuzxrz, hircjz pej lrgc rd u aejn uzn aprljz ajwjiul
rln mupa wulbjn up 3 irbhlja [pej irbhlj xa vripe u lxpplj rwji pvr
aexllxzqa, uzn grzpuxza 100 grfjgca] uzn 67 grfjgca. uggrinxzq pr pej
xznxgpmjzp, u frlxgjmuz eun aprffjn pexa hry ua ej vua fuaaxzq vxpe exa
grmfuzxrz, ver vua guiiyxzq pej mupa rz exa aerblnji. pej hry uzn
exa grmfuzxrz grzdjaajn up rzgj, uzn vjij hrpe xmfixarzjn. pej hry’a
grmfuzxrz, u lrgcamxpe, nxjn xz fixarz, uzn ar pej hry vua hjxzq pixjn
ulrzj. pej rln mupa vjij lyxzq rz pej puhlj ua pej rhojgpa rd mupjixul
jwxnjzgj. pej hbaxzjaa vua grznbgpjn obap xz pej aumj muzzji ua pej nuy
hjdrij, vxpe pej verlj uimrbiy rd jwxnjzgj, firrda, vxpzjaaja, avjuixzq
xz, kbjapxrza, jtfjipa, uzn giraa-jtumxzupxrza. xz uzavji pr jwjiy
kbjapxrz fbp pr exm hy pej fijaxnjzp, pej firajgbpri, ri pej unwrgupj,
pej frlxgjmuz (rzj rd pej vxpzjaaja) xz wuixuhly jojgpjn pej vrina:
“obap ar,” ri “guz’p pjll.” yjp, xz afxpj rd exa hjxzq apbfjdxjn, uzn
ijznjijn u mjij mugexzj hy mxlxpuiy nxagxflxzj, exa ijlbgpuzgj pr afjuc
uhrbp pej uiijap rd pexa fixarzji vua jwxnjzp. uzrpeji vxpzjaa, uz rln
erbaj firfixjpri, uzn rvzji rd pej mupa, jwxnjzply u ixge rln muz, vejz
uacjn vejpeji pej mupa vjij exa, ijlbgpuzply xnjzpxdxjn pejm ua abge.
vejz pej fbhlxg firajgbpri uacjn exm veup ej mjuzp pr nr vxpe pejaj
mupa, veup baj pejy vjij pr exm, ej qrp uzqiy, uzn uzavjijn: “pej njwxl
pucj peraj mupa; x nrz’p vuzp pejm up ull. eun x czrvz pejij vrbln hj
ull pexa hrpeji uhrbp pejm x aerbln zrp euwj qrzj lrrcxzq dri pejm, hbp
vrbln iupeji euwj unnjn u pjz-irbhlj zrpj ri pvr pr pejm, rzly zrp pr
hj niuqqjn ejij uzn fjapjijn vxpe kbjapxrza. x euwj afjzp u lrp
rz xawrapgexca. hjaxnja, x um zrp vjll. x euwj hjjz abddjixzq dirm
iejbmupxam dri pej luap ajwjz yjuia.” xp vua peba pej vxpzjaa afrcj.

pej uggbajn exmajld grzdjaajn jwjiypexzq, uzn lrrcxzq irbzn apbfxnly,
lxcj uz uzxmul peup xa gubqep, ijlupjn erv xp eun ull euffjzjn. apxll
pej fbhlxg firajgbpri, niuvxzq bf exa aerblnjia ua ej eun nrzj pej nuy
hjdrij, uacjn abhplj kbjapxrza gulgblupjn pr gupge u gbzzxzq gixmxzul.

xz exa afjjge ej firwjn peup pej pejdp eun hjjz grmmxppjn dirm u
nvjllxzq-flugj, uzn u lrgc eun hjjz hircjz; uzn peup pej hry, pejijdrij,
njajiwjn u ejuwy fbzxaemjzp. pej unwrgupj uffrxzpjn hy pej grbip firwjn
peup pej pejdp vua zrp grmmxppjn dirm u nvjllxzq-flugj, uzn peup, perbqe
pej gixmj vua u ajixrba rzj, pej fixarzji vua zrp ar wjiy nuzqjirba
pr argxjpy ua pej firajgbpri apupjn. pej fijaxnjzp uaabmjn pej irlj rd
uharlbpj zjbpiulxpy xz pej aumj vuy ua ej eun nrzj rz pej fijwxrba nuy,
uzn xmfijaajn rz pej obiy dugpa vexge pejy ull czjv uzn grbln zrp ejlf
czrvxzq. pejz gumj uz xzpjiwul, obap ua pej nuy hjdrij, uzn pejy amrcjn;
uzn uquxz pej baeji gulljn rbp “pej obnqja uij grmxzq,” uzn xz pej
aumj vuy pej pvr qjznuimja aup piyxzq pr cjjf uvucj uzn peijupjzxzq pej
fixarzji vxpe pejxi zucjn vjufrza.

pej firgjjnxzqa aervjn peup pexa hry vua uffijzpxgjn hy exa dupeji up
u prhuggr dugpriy, vejij ej ijmuxzjn dxwj yjuia. pexa yjui ej eun hjjz
nxageuiqjn hy pej rvzji udpji u apixcj, uzn, euwxzq lrap exa flugj, ej
vuznjijn uhrbp pej prvz vxperbp uzy vric, nixzcxzq ull ej fraajaajn. xz
u piucpxi [gejuf ijapubiuzp] ej mjp uzrpeji lxcj exmajld, ver eun lrap
exa flugj hjdrij pej fixarzji eun, u lrgcamxpe hy piunj uzn u nibzcuin.
rzj zxqep, peraj pvr, hrpe nibzc, hircj pej lrgc rd u aejn uzn prrc pej
dxiap pexzq pejy euffjzjn pr luy euzna rz. pejy grzdjaajn ull uzn vjij
fbp xz fixarz, vejij pej lrgcamxpe nxjn vexlj uvuxpxzq pej pixul. pej
hry vua zrv hjxzq pixjn ua u nuzqjirba gijupbij, dirm verm argxjpy mbap
hj firpjgpjn.

“obap ua nuzqjirba u gijupbij ua yjapjinuy’a gblfixp,” perbqep
zjcelbnrdd, lxapjzxzq pr ull peup vua qrxzq rz hjdrij exm. “pejy uij
nuzqjirba, uzn vj ver obnqj pejm? x, u iucj, uz unblpjiji, u njgjxwji.
vj uij zrp nuzqjirba. hbp, jwjz abffraxzq peup pexa hry xa pej mrap
nuzqjirba rd ull peup uij ejij xz pej grbip, veup aerbln hj nrzj dirm u
grmmrz-ajzaj frxzp rd wxjv vejz ej eua hjjz gubqep? xp xa gljui peup ej
xa zrp uz jtgjfpxrzul jwxl-nrji, hbp u mrap rinxzuiy hry; jwjiy rzj
ajja xp--uzn peup ej eua hjgrmj veup ej xa axmfly hjgubaj ej qrp xzpr
gxigbmapuzgja peup gijupj abge geuiugpjia, uzn, pejijdrij, pr fijwjzp
abge u hry dirm qrxzq virzq pej gxigbmapuzgja peup gijupj pejaj
bzdripbzupj hjxzqa mbap hj nrzj uvuy vxpe.

“hbp veup nr vj nr? vj ajxsj rzj abge lun ver euffjza pr qjp gubqep,
czrvxzq vjll peup pejij uij perbauzna lxcj exm verm vj euwj zrp gubqep,
uzn ajzn exm pr fixarz, vejij xnljzjaa, ri mrap bzverljarmj, bajljaa
luhrbi xa drigjn rz exm, xz grmfuzy rd rpejia vjucjzjn uzn jzazuijn hy
pej lxwja pejy euwj ljn. uzn pejz vj ajzn exm, up pej fbhlxg jtfjzaj,
dirm pej mragrv pr pej xicrbpac qrwjizmjzp, xz grmfuzy vxpe pej mrap
njfiuwjn rd mjz.

“hbp vj nr zrpexzq pr njapiry pej grznxpxrza xz vexge fjrflj lxcj pejaj
uij firnbgjn; rz pej grzpiuiy, vj abffrip pej japuhlxaemjzpa vejij
pejy uij drimjn. pejaj japuhlxaemjzpa uij vjll czrvz: dugprixja, mxlla,
vricaerfa, fbhlxg-erbaja, qxz-aerfa, hirpejla. uzn vj nr zrp njapiry
pejaj flugja, hbp, lrrcxzq up pejm ua zjgjaauiy, vj abffrip uzn ijqblupj
pejm. vj jnbgupj xz pexa vuy zrp rzj, hbp mxllxrza rd fjrflj, uzn pejz
gupge rzj rd pejm uzn xmuqxzj peup vj euwj nrzj armjpexzq, peup vj euwj
qbuinjn rbiajlwja, uzn zrpexzq mrij guz hj jtfjgpjn rd ba. euwj vj
zrp ajzp exm dirm pej mragrv pr pej xicrbpac qrwjizmjzp?” peba perbqep
zjcelbnrdd vxpe bzbabul gljuizjaa uzn wxwxnzjaa, axppxzq xz exa
exqe-hugcjn geuxi zjtp pr pej grlrzjl, uzn lxapjzxzq pr pej nxddjijzp
xzprzupxrza rd pej unwrgupja’, firajgbpri’a, uzn fijaxnjzp’a wrxgja, uzn
lrrcxzq up pejxi ajld-grzdxnjzp qjapbija. “uzn erv mbge uzn veup euin
jddrip pexa fijpjzgj ijkbxija,” grzpxzbjn zjcelbnrdd xz exa mxzn,
qluzgxzq irbzn pej jzrimrba irrm, pej fripiuxpa, lumfa, uimgeuxia,
bzxdrima, pej pexgc vulla uzn luiqj vxznrva; uzn fxgpbixzq pr exmajld
pej pijmjznrba axsj rd pej hbxlnxzq, uzn pej apxll mrij frznjirba
nxmjzaxrza rd pej verlj rd pexa riquzxaupxrz, vxpe xpa uimy rd
rddxgxula, agixhja, vupgemjz, mjaajzqjia, zrp rzly xz pexa flugj, hbp
ull rwji ibaaxu, ver ijgjxwj vuqja dri guiiyxzq rz pexa grmjny vexge zr
rzj zjjna. “abffraxzq vj afjzp rzj-ebznijnpe rd pejaj jddripa ejlfxzq
pejaj guapuvuya, verm vj zrv rzly ijquin ua euzna uzn hrnxja, ijkbxijn
hy ba dri rbi rvz fjugj uzn grmdrip. eun armj rzj geuzgjn pr pucj fxpy
rz exm uzn qxwjz armj ejlf up pej pxmj vejz frwjipy munj pejm ajzn exm
pr prvz, xp mxqep euwj hjjz abddxgxjzp,” zjcelbnrdd perbqep, lrrcxzq up
pej hry’a fxpjrba dugj. “ri jwjz lupji, vejz, udpji 12 erbia’ vric
up pej dugpriy, ej vua qrxzq pr pej fbhlxg-erbaj, ljn uvuy hy exa
grmfuzxrza, eun armj rzj pejz grmj uzn auxn, ‘nrz’p qr, wuzxu; xp xa
zrp ixqep,’ ej vrbln zrp euwj qrzj, zri qrp xzpr hun vuya, uzn vrbln zrp
euwj nrzj uzy virzq.

“hbp zr; zr rzj ver vrbln euwj pucjz fxpy rz exm gumj ugiraa pexa
uffijzpxgj xz pej yjuia ej lxwjn lxcj u frri lxpplj uzxmul xz pej prvz,
uzn vxpe exa euxi gbp glraj ar ua zrp pr hijjn wjimxz, uzn iuz jiiuzna
dri pej vricmjz. zr, ull ej ejuin uzn auv, dirm pej rlnji vricmjz uzn
exa grmfuzxrza, axzgj ej gumj pr lxwj xz prvz, vua peup ej ver gejupa,
nixzca, avjuia, ver qxwja uzrpeji u peiuaexzq, ver qrja rz pej lrraj,
xa u dxzj djllrv. xll, exa grzapxpbpxrz bznjimxzjn hy bzejulpey luhrbi,
nixzc, uzn njhubgejiy--hjvxlnjijn ua xz u nijum, czrgcxzq uxmljaaly
uhrbp prvz, ej qjpa xzpr armj arip rd u aejn, uzn pucja dirm pejij armj
rln mupa, vexge zrhrny zjjna--uzn ejij vj, ull rd ba jnbgupjn fjrflj,
ixge ri grmdripuhly rdd, mjjp prqjpeji, nijaajn xz qrrn glrpeja uzn dxzj
bzxdrima, xz u afljznxn ufuipmjzp, pr mrgc pexa bzdripbzupj hirpeji rd
rbia verm vj rbiajlwja euwj ibxzjn.

“pjiixhlj! xp xa nxddxgblp pr auy vejpeji pej gibjlpy ri pej uhabinxpy
xa qijupji, hbp pej rzj uzn pej rpeji ajjm pr ijuge pejxi glxmut.”

zjcelbnrdd perbqep ull pexa, zr lrzqji lxapjzxzq pr veup vua qrxzq rz,
uzn ej vua eriiri-apibgc hy peup vexge vua hjxzq ijwjuljn pr exm. ej
grbln zrp bznjiapuzn vey ej eun zrp hjjz uhlj pr ajj ull pexa hjdrij,
uzn vey rpejia vjij bzuhlj pr ajj xp.



geufpji tttw.

pej firgbijbi--zjcelbnrdd ijdbaja pr ajiwj.

nbixzq uz xzpjiwul zjcelbnrdd qrp bf uzn vjzp rbp xzpr pej griixnri,
vxpe pej xzpjzpxrz rd zrp ijpbizxzq pr pej grbip. ljp pejm nr veup pejy
lxcjn vxpe exm, ej grbln pucj zr mrij fuip xz pexa uvdbl uzn eriixn
prmdrrljiy.

euwxzq xzkbxijn vejij pej firgbijbi’a guhxzjp vua ej vjzp apiuxqep pr
exm. pej uppjznuzp nxn zrp vxae pr ljp exm xz, auyxzq peup pej firgbijbi
vua hbay, hbp zjcelbnrdd fuxn zr ejjn uzn vjzp pr pej nrri, vejij ej vua
mjp hy uz rddxgxul. ej uacjn pr hj uzzrbzgjn pr pej firgbijbi, auyxzq ej
vua rz pej obiy uzn eun u wjiy xmfripuzp grmmbzxgupxrz pr mucj.

exa pxplj uzn qrrn glrpeja vjij rd uaaxapuzgj pr exm. pej rddxgxul
uzzrbzgjn exm pr pej firgbijbi, uzn zjcelbnrdd vua ljp xz. pej firgbijbi
mjp exm apuznxzq, jwxnjzply uzzryjn up pej fjiaxapjzgj vxpe vexge
zjcelbnrdd njmuznjn unmxppuzgj.

“veup xa xp yrb vuzp?” pej firgbijbi uacjn, ajwjijly.

“x um rz pej obiy; my zumj xa zjcelbnrdd, uzn xp xa uharlbpjly zjgjaauiy
dri mj pr ajj pej fixarzji mualrwu,” zjcelbnrdd auxn, kbxgcly uzn
ijarlbpjly, hlbaexzq, uzn djjlxzq peup ej vua pucxzq u apjf vexge vrbln
euwj u njgxaxwj xzdlbjzgj rz exa lxdj.

pej firgbijbi vua u aerip, nuic muz, vxpe aerip, qixssly euxi, kbxgc,
afuiclxzq jyja, uzn u pexgc hjuin gbp glraj rz exa firojgpxzq lrvji ouv.

“mualrwu? yja, rd grbiaj, x czrv. aej vua uggbajn rd frxarzxzq,” pej
firgbijbi auxn, kbxjply. “hbp vey nr yrb vuzp pr ajj eji?” uzn pejz, ua
xd vxaexzq pr przj nrvz exa kbjapxrz, ej unnjn, “x guzzrp qxwj yrb pej
fjimxaaxrz vxperbp czrvxzq vey yrb ijkbxij xp.”

“x ijkbxij xp dri u fuipxgbluily xmfripuzp ijuarz.”

“yja?” auxn pej firgbijbi, uzn, lxdpxzq exa jyja, lrrcjn uppjzpxwjly up
zjcelbnrdd. “eua eji guaj hjjz ejuin ri zrp?”

“aej vua pixjn yjapjinuy, uzn bzobaply ajzpjzgjn; aej xa xzzrgjzp.”

“yja? xd aej vua ajzpjzgjn rzly yjapjinuy,” vjzp rz pej firgbijbi,
fuyxzq zr uppjzpxrz pr zjcelbnrdd’a apupjmjzp grzgjizxzq mualrwu’a
xzzrgjzgj, “aej mbap apxll hj xz pej fijlxmxzuiy njpjzpxrz fixarz bzpxl
pej ajzpjzgj xa njlxwjijn xz xpa dxzul drim. wxaxpxzq xa ullrvjn pejij
rzly rz gjipuxz nuya; x aerbln unwxaj yrb pr xzkbxij pejij.”

“hbp x mbap ajj eji ua arrz ua fraaxhlj,” zjcelbnrdd auxn, exa ouv
pijmhlxzq ua ej djlp pej njgxaxwj mrmjzp uffirugexzq.

“vey mbap yrb?” auxn pej firgbijbi, lxdpxzq exa hirva vxpe armj
uqxpupxrz.

“hjgubaj x hjpiuyjn eji uzn hirbqep eji pr pej grznxpxrz vexge jtfrajn
eji pr pexa uggbaupxrz.”

“ull pej aumj, x guzzrp ajj veup xp eua pr nr vxpe wxaxpxzq eji.”

“pexa: peup vejpeji x abggjjn ri zrp xz qjppxzq pej ajzpjzgj geuzqjn x
vuzp pr drllrv eji, uzn--muiiy eji,” auxn zjcelbnrdd, prbgejn pr pjuia
hy exa rvz grznbgp, uzn up pej aumj pxmj fljuajn pr ajj pej jddjgp ej
firnbgjn rz pej firgbijbi.

“ijully! njui mj!” auxn pej firgbijbi. “pexa xa gjipuxzly u wjiy
jtgjfpxrzul guaj. x hjlxjwj yrb uij u mjmhji rd pej ciuazrfriac ibiul
unmxzxapiupxrz?” ej uacjn, ua xd ej ijmjmhjijn euwxzq ejuin hjdrij rd
pexa zjcelbnrdd, ver vua zrv mucxzq ar apiuzqj u njgluiupxrz.

“x hjq yrbi fuinrz, hbp x nr zrp pexzc peup eua uzypexzq pr nr vxpe my
ijkbjap,” uzavjijn zjcelbnrdd, dlbaexzq uzqixly.

“gjipuxzly zrp,” auxn pej firgbijbi, vxpe u aguigjly fjigjfpxhlj amxlj
uzn zrp xz pej ljuap uhuaejn; “rzly yrbi vxae xa ar jtpiurinxzuiy uzn ar
rbp rd pej grmmrz.”

“vjll; hbp guz x qjp pej fjimxaaxrz?”

“pej fjimxaaxrz? yja, x vxll qxwj yrb uz rinji rd unmxppuzgj nxijgply.
pucj u ajup.”

ej vjzp bf pr pej puhlj, aup nrvz, uzn hjquz pr vixpj. “fljuaj axp
nrvz.”

zjcelbnrdd grzpxzbjn pr apuzn.

euwxzq vixppjz uz rinji rd unmxppuzgj, uzn euznjn xp pr zjcelbnrdd, pej
firgbijbi lrrcjn gbixrbaly up exm.

“x mbap ular apupj peup x guz zr lrzqji pucj fuip xz pej ajaaxrza.”

“pejz yrb vxll euwj pr luy wulxn ijuarza hjdrij pej grbip, ua yrb, rd
grbiaj, czrv.”

“my ijuarza uij peup x grzaxnji ull obnqxzq zrp rzly bajljaa, hbp
xmmriul.”

“yja,” auxn pej firgbijbi, vxpe pej aumj aguigjly fjigjfpxhlj amxlj,
ua xd pr aerv peup pexa cxzn rd njgluiupxrz vua vjll czrvz pr exm uzn
hjlrzqjn pr pej umbaxzq arip. “yja, hbp yrb vxll gjipuxzly bznjiapuzn
peup x ua firgbijbi, guz zrp uqijj vxpe yrb rz pexa frxzp. pejijdrij,
x aerbln unwxaj yrb pr uffly pr pej grbip, vexge vxll grzaxnji yrbi
njgluiupxrz, uzn dxzn xp wulxn ri zrp wulxn, uzn xz pej luppji guaj vxll
xmfraj u dxzj. uffly, pejz, pr pej grbip.”

“x euwj munj my njgluiupxrz, uzn aeull uffly zrvejij jlaj,” zjcelbnrdd
auxn, uzqixly.

“vjll, pejz, qrrn-udpjizrrz,” auxn pej firgbijbi, hrvxzq exa ejun,
jwxnjzply uztxrba pr hj ixn rd pexa apiuzqj wxaxpri.

“ver vua peup yrb eun ejij?” uacjn rzj rd pej mjmhjia rd pej grbip, ua
ej jzpjijn, obap udpji zjcelbnrdd ljdp pej irrm.

“zjcelbnrdd, yrb czrv; pej aumj peup bajn pr mucj ull aripa rd apiuzqj
apupjmjzpa up pej ciuazrfriac ibiul mjjpxzqa. obap duzgy! ej xa rz pej
obiy, uzn umrzq pej fixarzjia pejij xa u vrmuz ri qxil ajzpjzgjn pr
fjzul ajiwxpbnj, verm ej auya ej hjpiuyjn, uzn zrv ej vuzpa pr muiiy
eji.”

“yrb nrz’p mjuz pr auy ar.”

“peup’a veup ej prln mj. uzn xz abge u apiuzqj apupj rd jtgxpjmjzp!”

“pejij xa armjpexzq uhzrimul xz pej yrbzq mjz rd pr-nuy.”

“re, hbp ej xa zrp ar wjiy yrbzq.”

“yja. hbp erv pxijarmj yrbi dumrba xwraejzcu vua. ej guiixja pej nuy hy
vjuiyxzq rzj rbp. ej pulcjn uzn pulcjn vxperbp jzn.”

“re, peup cxzn rd fjrflj aerbln hj axmfly aprffjn, ri pejy vxll hjgrmj
ijul rhapibgpxrzxapa.”



geufpji tttwx.

zjcelbnrdd jznjuwrbia pr wxaxp mualrwu.

dirm pej firgbijbi zjcelbnrdd vjzp apiuxqep pr pej fijlxmxzuiy njpjzpxrz
fixarz. ervjwji, zr mualrwu vua pr hj drbzn pejij, uzn pej xzafjgpri
jtfluxzjn pr zjcelbnrdd peup aej vrbln firhuhly hj xz pej rln pjmfriuiy
fixarz. zjcelbnrdd vjzp pejij.

yja, cupjixzu mualrwu vua pejij.

pej nxapuzgj hjpvjjz pej pvr fixarza vua jzrimrba, uzn zjcelbnrdd rzly
ijugejn pej rln fixarz prvuina jwjzxzq. ej vua qrxzq bf pr pej nrri rd
pej luiqj, qlrrmy hbxlnxzq, hbp pej ajzpxzjl aprffjn exm uzn iuzq. u
vuinji gumj xz uzavji pr pej hjll. zjcelbnrdd aervjn exm exa rinji rd
unmxppuzgj, hbp pej vuinji auxn ej grbln zrp ljp exm xz vxperbp pej
xzafjgpri’a fjimxaaxrz. zjcelbnrdd vjzp pr ajj pej xzafjgpri. ua ej vua
qrxzq bf pej apuxia ej ejuin nxapuzp arbzna rd armj grmflxgupjn hiuwbiu,
fluyjn rz pej fxuzr. vejz u giraa ajiwuzp qxil, vxpe u huznuqjn jyj,
rfjzjn pej nrri pr exm, peraj arbzna ajjmjn pr jagufj dirm pej irrm
uzn pr apixcj exa gui. xp vua u ieufarny rd lxasp’a, peup jwjiyhrny vua
pxijn rd, afljznxnly fluyjn hbp rzly pr rzj frxzp. vejz peup frxzp vua
ijugejn pej aumj pexzq vua ijfjupjn. zjcelbnrdd uacjn pej huznuqjn muxn
vejpeji pej xzafjgpri vua xz. aej uzavjijn peup ej vua zrp xz.

“vxll ej ijpbiz arrz?”

pej ieufarny uquxz aprffjn uzn ijgrmmjzgjn lrbnly uzn hixllxuzply uquxz
bf pr pej aumj geuimjn frxzp.

“x vxll qr uzn uac,” uzn pej ajiwuzp vjzp uvuy.

“pjll exm ej xa zrp xz uzn vrz’p hj pr-nuy; ej xa rbp wxaxpxzq. veup nr
pejy grmj hrpejixzq dri?” gumj pej arbzn rd u vrmuz’a wrxgj dirm hjexzn
pej nrri, uzn uquxz pej ieufarny iuppljn rz uzn aprffjn, uzn pej arbzn
rd u geuxi fbaejn hugc vua ejuin. xp vua fluxz pej xiixpupjn fxuzxap
mjuzp pr ijhbcj pej pxijarmj wxaxpri, ver eun grmj up uz bzpxmjly erbi.
“fufu xa zrp xz,” u fulj qxil vxpe gixmfjn euxi auxn, giraaly, grmxzq
rbp xzpr pej uzpj-irrm, hbp, ajjxzq u yrbzq muz xz u qrrn grup, aej
ardpjzjn.

“grmj xz, fljuaj. . . . veup xa xp yrb vuzp?”

“x vuzp pr ajj u fixarzji xz pexa fixarz.”

“u frlxpxgul rzj, x abffraj?”

“zr, zrp u frlxpxgul rzj. x euwj u fjimxaaxrz dirm pej firgbijbi.”

“vjll, x nrz’p czrv, uzn fufu xa rbp; hbp grmj xz, fljuaj,” aej auxn,
uquxz, “ri jlaj afjuc pr pej uaaxapuzp. ej xa xz pej rddxgj up fijajzp;
uffly pejij. veup xa yrbi zumj?”

“x peuzc yrb,” auxn zjcelbnrdd, vxperbp uzavjixzq eji kbjapxrz, uzn vjzp
rbp.

pej nrri vua zrp yjp glrajn udpji exm vejz pej aumj lxwjly przja
ijgrmmjzgjn. xz pej grbipyuin zjcelbnrdd mjp uz rddxgji vxpe hixaply
mrbapugeja, uzn uacjn dri pej uaaxapuzp-xzafjgpri. xp vua pej uaaxapuzp
exmajld. ej lrrcjn up pej rinji rd unmxppuzgj, hbp auxn peup ej grbln
zrp njgxnj pr ljp exm xz vxpe u fuaa dri pej fijlxmxzuiy fixarz.
hjaxnja, xp vua prr lupj. “fljuaj pr grmj uquxz pr-mriirv. pr mriirv, up
10, jwjiyhrny xa ullrvjn pr qr xz. grmj pejz, uzn pej xzafjgpri exmajld
vxll hj up ermj. pejz yrb guz euwj pej xzpjiwxjv jxpeji xz pej grmmrz
irrm ri, xd pej xzafjgpri ullrva xp, xz pej rddxgj.”

uzn ar zjcelbnrdd nxn zrp abggjjn xz qjppxzq uz xzpjiwxjv peup nuy,
uzn ijpbizjn ermj. ua ej vjzp ulrzq pej apijjpa, jtgxpjn up pej xnju rd
mjjpxzq eji, ej zr lrzqji perbqep uhrbp pej luv grbipa, hbp ijgulljn exa
grzwjiaupxrza vxpe pej firgbijbi uzn pej xzafjgpri’a uaaxapuzp. pej
dugp peup ej eun hjjz ajjcxzq uz xzpjiwxjv vxpe eji, uzn eun prln pej
firgbijbi, uzn eun hjjz xz pvr fixarza, ar jtgxpjn exm peup xp vua lrzq
hjdrij ej grbln gulm nrvz. vejz ej qrp ermj ej up rzgj djpgejn rbp exa
nxuiy, peup eun lrzq ijmuxzjn bzprbgejn, ijun u djv ajzpjzgja rbp rd xp,
uzn pejz virpj ua drllrva:

“dri pvr yjuia x euwj zrp vixppjz uzypexzq xz my nxuiy, uzn perbqep x
zjwji aerbln ijpbiz pr pexa gexlnxaezjaa. yjp xp xa zrp gexlnxaezjaa,
hbp grzwjiaj vxpe my rvz ajld, vxpe pexa ijul nxwxzj ajld vexge lxwja
xz jwjiy muz. ull pexa pxmj peup x aljfp pejij vua zr rzj dri mj pr
grzwjiaj vxpe. x vua uvucjzjn hy uz jtpiurinxzuiy jwjzp rz pej 28pe
rd ufixl, xz pej luv grbip, vejz x vua rz pej obiy. x auv eji xz pej
fixarzjia’ nrgc, pej cupbaeu hjpiuyjn hy mj, xz u fixarzji’a glruc,
grznjmzjn pr fjzul ajiwxpbnj peirbqe u apiuzqj mxapucj, uzn my rvz
dublp. x euwj obap hjjz pr pej firgbijbi’a uzn pr pej fixarz, hbp x vua
zrp unmxppjn. x euwj ijarlwjn pr nr ull x guz pr ajj eji, pr grzdjaa pr
eji, uzn pr uprzj dri my axz, jwjz hy u muiixuqj. qrn ejlf mj. my arbl
xa up fjugj uzn x um dbll rd ory.”



geufpji tttwxx.

mualrwu ijgulla pej fuap.

peup zxqep mualrwu luy uvucj u lrzq pxmj vxpe eji jyja rfjz lrrcxzq up
pej nrri, xz dirzp rd vexge pej njugrz’a nubqepji cjfp fuaaxzq. aej vua
pexzcxzq peup zrpexzq vrbln xznbgj eji pr qr pr pej xaluzn rd auceulxz
uzn muiiy u grzwxgp, hbp vrbln uiiuzqj muppjia armjerv vxpe rzj rd pej
fixarz rddxgxula, pej ajgijpuiy, u vuinji, ri jwjz u vuinji’a uaaxapuzp.
“uijz’p pejy ull qxwjz peup vuy? rzly x mbap zrp qjp pexz, ri jlaj x um
lrap.”

aej perbqep rd erv pej unwrgupj eun lrrcjn up eji, uzn ular pej
fijaxnjzp, uzn rd pej mjz aej mjp, uzn peraj ver gumj xz rz fbifraj up
pej grbip. aej ijgrlljgpjn erv eji grmfuzxrz, hjipeu, ver gumj pr ajj
eji xz fixarz, eun prln eji uhrbp pej apbnjzp verm aej eun “lrwjn” vexlj
aej vua vxpe cxpujwu, uzn ver eun xzkbxijn uhrbp eji, uzn fxpxjn eji
wjiy mbge. aej ijgulljn muzy pr mxzn, rzly zrp zjcelbnrdd. aej zjwji
hirbqep hugc pr mxzn pej nuya rd eji gexlnerrn uzn yrbpe, uzn eji lrwj
pr zjcelbnrdd. peup vrbln euwj hjjz prr fuxzdbl. pejaj mjmrixja luy
bzprbgejn armjvejij njjf xz eji arbl; aej eun driqrppjz exm, uzn zjwji
ijgulljn uzn zjwji jwjz nijump rd exm. pr-nuy, xz pej grbip, aej nxn zrp
ijgrqzxaj exm, zrp rzly hjgubaj vejz aej luap auv exm ej vua xz bzxdrim,
vxperbp u hjuin, uzn eun rzly u amull mrbapugej uzn pexgc, gbily, perbqe
aerip euxi, uzn zrv vua huln uzn hjuinjn, hbp hjgubaj aej zjwji perbqep
uhrbp exm. aej eun hbixjn exa mjmriy rz peup pjiixhlj nuic zxqep vejz
ej, ijpbizxzq dirm pej uimy, eun fuaajn hy rz pej iuxlvuy vxperbp
aprffxzq pr gull rz exa ubzpa. cupbaeu pejz czjv eji grznxpxrz. bf pr
peup zxqep aej nxn zrp grzaxnji pej gexln peup luy hjzjupe eji ejuip
u hbinjz. hbp rz peup zxqep jwjiypexzq geuzqjn, uzn pej gexln hjgumj
zrpexzq hbp u vjxqep.

exa ubzpa eun jtfjgpjn zjcelbnrdd, eun uacjn exm pr grmj uzn ajj pejm xz
fuaaxzq, hbp ej eun pjljqiufejn peup ej grbln zrp grmj, ua ej eun pr hj
xz fjpjiahbiq up uz uffrxzpjn pxmj. vejz cupbaeu ejuin pexa aej munj bf
eji mxzn pr qr pr pej apupxrz uzn ajj exm. pej piuxz vua pr fuaa hy up
pvr r’glrgc xz pej zxqep. cupbaeu euwxzq ejlfjn pej rln lunxja pr hjn,
uzn fjiabunjn u lxpplj qxil, pej grrc’a nubqepji, muaecu, pr grmj vxpe
eji, fbp rz u fuxi rd rln hrrpa, peijv u aeuvl rwji eji ejun, qupejijn
bf eji nijaa, uzn iuz pr pej apupxrz.

xp vua u vuim, iuxzy, uzn vxzny ubpbmz zxqep. pej iuxz zrv fjlpjn nrvz
xz vuim, ejuwy nirfa, zrv aprffjn uquxz. xp vua prr nuic pr ajj pej fupe
ugiraa pej dxjln, uzn xz pej vrrn xp vua fxpge hlugc, ar peup ulperbqe
cupbaeu czjv pej vuy vjll, aej qrp rdd pej fupe, uzn qrp pr pej lxpplj
apupxrz vejij pej piuxz aprffjn dri peijj mxzbpja, zrp hjdrij, ua aej
eun erfjn, hbp udpji pej ajgrzn hjll eun hjjz ibzq. ebiiyxzq bf pej
flupdrim, cupbaeu auv exm up rzgj up pej vxznrva rd u dxiap-gluaa
guiixuqj. pvr rddxgjia aup rffraxpj juge rpeji rz pej wjlwjp-grwjijn
ajupa, fluyxzq guina. pexa guiixuqj vua wjiy hixqeply lxp bf; rz pej
lxpplj puhlj hjpvjjz pej ajupa aprrn pvr pexgc, nixffxzq guznlja. ej aup
xz exa glrajdxppxzq hijjgeja rz pej uim rd pej ajup, ljuzxzq uquxzap
pej hugc, uzn lubqejn. ua arrz ua aej ijgrqzxajn exm aej czrgcjn up pej
guiixuqj vxznrv vxpe eji hjzbmhjn euzn, hbp up peup mrmjzp pej luap hjll
iuzq, uzn pej piuxz dxiap quwj u hugcvuin ojic, uzn pejz qiunbully pej
guiixuqja hjquz pr mrwj drivuin. rzj rd pej fluyjia iraj vxpe pej guina
xz exa euzn, uzn lrrcjn rbp. aej czrgcjn uquxz, uzn fijaajn eji dugj pr
pej vxznrv, hbp pej guiixuqj mrwjn rz, uzn aej vjzp ulrzqaxnj lrrcxzq
xz. pej rddxgji pixjn pr lrvji pej vxznrv, hbp grbln zrp. zjcelbnrdd
fbaejn exm uaxnj uzn hjquz lrvjixzq xp exmajld. pej piuxz vjzp duapji,
ar peup aej eun pr vulc kbxgcly. pej piuxz vjzp rz apxll duapji uzn pej
vxznrv rfjzjn. pej qbuin fbaejn eji uaxnj, uzn obmfjn xz. cupbaeu iuz
rz, ulrzq pej vjp hruina rd pej flupdrim, uzn vejz aej gumj pr pej jzn
aej grbln euinly aprf ejiajld dirm dullxzq ua aej iuz nrvz pej apjfa
rd pej flupdrim. aej vua ibzzxzq hy pej axnj rd pej iuxlvuy, perbqe pej
dxiap-gluaa guiixuqj eun lrzq fuaajn eji, uzn pej ajgrzn-gluaa guiixuqja
vjij qlxnxzq hy duapji, uzn up luap pej pexin-gluaa guiixuqja apxll
duapji. hbp aej iuz rz, uzn vejz pej luap guiixuqj vxpe pej lumfa up
pej hugc eun qrzj hy, aej eun ulijuny ijugejn pej puzc vexge djn pej
jzqxzja, uzn vua bzaejlpjijn dirm pej vxzn, vexge vua hlrvxzq eji aeuvl
uhrbp uzn mucxzq eji acxip glxzq irbzn eji ljqa. pej aeuvl dljv rdd eji
ejun, hbp apxll aej iuz rz.

“cupjixzu mxgeujlrwzu, yrb’wj lrap yrbi aeuvl!” agijumjn pej lxpplj
qxil, ver vua piyxzq pr cjjf bf vxpe eji.

cupbaeu aprffjn, peijv hugc eji ejun, uzn gupgexzq erln rd xp vxpe hrpe
euzna arhhjn ulrbn. “qrzj!” aej agijumjn.

“ej xa axppxzq xz u wjlwjp uim-geuxi uzn orcxzq uzn nixzcxzq, xz u
hixqeply lxp guiixuqj, uzn x, rbp ejij xz pej mbn, xz pej nuiczjaa, xz
pej vxzn uzn pej iuxz, um apuznxzq uzn vjjfxzq,” aej perbqep pr ejiajld;
uzn aup nrvz rz pej qirbzn, arhhxzq ar lrbn peup pej lxpplj qxil qrp
dixqepjzjn, uzn fbp eji uima irbzn eji, vjp ua aej vua.

“grmj ermj, njui,” aej auxn.

“vejz u piuxz fuaaja--pejz bznji u guiixuqj, uzn pejij vxll hj uz jzn,”
 cupbaeu vua pexzcxzq, vxperbp ejjnxzq pej qxil.

uzn aej munj bf eji mxzn pr nr xp, vejz, ua xp ulvuya euffjza, vejz u
mrmjzp rd kbxjp drllrva qijup jtgxpjmjzp, ej, pej gexln--exa gexln--munj
exmajld czrvz vxpexz eji. abnnjzly ull peup u mrmjzp hjdrij eun hjjz
primjzpxzq eji, ar peup xp eun ajjmjn xmfraaxhlj pr lxwj, ull eji
hxppjizjaa prvuina exm, uzn pej vxae pr ijwjzqj ejiajld, jwjz hy nyxzq,
fuaajn uvuy; aej qijv kbxjpji, qrp bf, fbp pej aeuvl rz eji ejun, uzn
vjzp ermj.

vjp, mbnny, uzn kbxpj jteubapjn, aej ijpbizjn, uzn dirm peup nuy pej
geuzqj vexge hirbqep eji vejij aej zrv vua hjquz pr rfjiupj xz eji arbl.
hjqxzzxzq dirm peup nijundbl zxqep, aej gjuajn hjlxjwxzq xz qrn uzn
xz qrrnzjaa. aej eun ejiajld hjlxjwjn xz qrn, uzn hjlxjwjn peup rpeji
fjrflj ular hjlxjwjn xz exm; hbp udpji peup zxqep aej hjgumj grzwxzgjn
peup zr rzj hjlxjwjn, uzn peup ull peup vua auxn uhrbp qrn uzn exa
luva vua njgjfpxrz uzn bzpibpe. ej verm aej lrwjn, uzn ver eun lrwjn
eji--yja, aej czjv peup--eun peirvz eji uvuy; eun uhbajn eji lrwj. yjp
ej vua pej hjap rd ull pej fjrflj aej czjv. ull pej ijap vjij apxll
vriaj. ull peup udpjivuina euffjzjn pr eji apijzqpejzjn eji xz pexa
hjlxjd up jwjiy apjf. exa ubzpa, pej fxrba rln lunxja, pbizjn eji rbp
vejz aej grbln zr lrzqji ajiwj pejm ua aej bajn pr. uzn rd ull peraj aej
mjp, pej vrmjz bajn eji ua u mjuza rd qjppxzq mrzjy, pej mjz, dirm pej
rln frlxgj rddxgji nrvz pr pej vuinjia rd pej fixarz, lrrcjn up eji ua
rz uz rhojgp dri fljuabij. uzn zr rzj xz pej vriln guijn dri ubqep hbp
fljuabij. xz pexa hjlxjd pej rln ubperi vxpe verm aej eun grmj prqjpeji
xz pej ajgrzn yjui rd eji lxdj rd xznjfjznjzgj eun apijzqpejzjn eji. ej
eun prln eji rbpixqep peup xp vua pexa peup grzapxpbpjn pej euffxzjaa rd
lxdj, uzn ej gulljn xp frjpxgul uzn ujapejpxg.

jwjiyhrny lxwjn dri exmajld rzly, dri exa fljuabij, uzn ull pej pulc
grzgjizxzq qrn uzn ixqepjrbazjaa vua njgjfpxrz. uzn xd armjpxmja nrbhpa
uiraj xz eji mxzn uzn aej vrznjijn vey jwjiypexzq vua ar xll-uiiuzqjn
xz pej vriln peup ull ebip juge rpeji, uzn munj juge rpeji abddji, aej
perbqep xp hjap zrp pr nvjll rz xp, uzn xd aej djlp mjluzgerly aej grbln
amrcj, ri, hjppji apxll, nixzc, uzn xp vrbln fuaa.



geufpji tttwxxx.

abznuy xz fixarz--fijfuixzq dri muaa.

rz abznuy mrizxzq up dxwj r’glrgc, vejz u vexaplj arbznjn xz pej
griixnri rd pej vrmjz’a vuin rd pej fixarz, criuhljwu, ver vua ulijuny
uvucj, gulljn mualrwu.

“re, njui! lxdj uquxz,” perbqep mualrwu, vxpe eriiri, xzwrlbzpuixly
hijupexzq xz pej uxi peup eun hjgrmj pjiixhly zrxarmj prvuina pej
mrizxzq. aej vxaejn pr dull ualjjf uquxz, pr jzpji xzpr pej ijqxrz rd
rhlxwxrz, hbp pej euhxp rd djui rwjigumj aljjfxzjaa, uzn aej aup bf uzn
lrrcjn irbzn, niuvxzq eji djjp bznji eji. pej vrmjz eun ull qrp bf; rzly
pej jlnji gexlnijz vjij apxll ualjjf. pej afxixp-piunji vua guijdblly
niuvxzq u glruc dirm bznji pej gexlnijz, ar ua zrp pr vucj pejm. pej
vupgemuz’a vxdj vua euzqxzq bf pej iuqa pr niy peup ajiwjn pej huhy
ua avunnlxzq glrpeja, vexlj pej huhy vua agijumxzq njafjiupjly xz
pejrnraxu’a uima, ver vua piyxzq pr kbxjp xp. pej grzabmfpxwj vrmuz vua
grbqexzq vxpe eji euzna fijaajn pr eji gejap, vexlj pej hlrrn ibaejn pr
eji dugj, uzn aej axqejn lrbnly, ulmrap agijumxzq, xz pej xzpjiwula rd
grbqexzq. pej dup, ijn-euxijn vrmuz vua lyxzq rz eji hugc, vxpe
czjja niuvz bf, uzn lrbnly ijlupxzq u nijum. pej rln vrmuz uggbajn rd
xzgjznxuixam vua apuznxzq xz dirzp rd pej xmuqj, giraaxzq ejiajld uzn
hrvxzq, uzn ijfjupxzq pej aumj vrina rwji uzn rwji uquxz. pej njugrz’a
nubqepji aup rz pej hjnapjun, lrrcxzq hjdrij eji, vxpe u nbll, aljjfy
dugj. ceriraeuwcu vua pvxapxzq eji hlugc, rxly, gruiaj euxi irbzn eji
dxzqjia. pej arbzn rd alxfaern djjp vua ejuin xz pej fuaauqj, uzn pej
nrri rfjzjn pr ljp xz pvr grzwxgpa, nijaajn xz ougcjpa uzn qijy pirbajia
peup nxn zrp ijuge pr pejxi uzclja. vxpe ajixrba, giraa dugja pejy
lxdpjn pej apxzcxzq pbh uzn guiixjn xp rbp rd pej gjll. pej vrmjz vjzp
rbp pr pej pufa xz pej griixnri pr vuae. pejij pej ijn-euxijn vrmuz
uquxz hjquz u kbuiijl vxpe u vrmuz dirm uzrpeji gjll.

“xa xp pej arlxpuiy gjll yrb vuzp?” aerbpjn uz rln ouxlji, aluffxzq pej
ijn-euxijn vrmuz rz eji huij, dup hugc, ar peup xp arbznjn peirbqe pej
griixnri. “yrb hj kbxjp.”

“luvca! pej rln rzj’a fluydbl,” auxn pej vrmuz, pucxzq exa ugpxrz dri u
guijaa.

“zrv, pejz, hj kbxgc; qjp ijuny dri pej muaa.” mualrwu eun euinly pxmj
pr nr eji euxi uzn nijaa vejz pej xzafjgpri gumj vxpe exa uaaxapuzpa.

“grmj rbp dri xzafjgpxrz,” gixjn u ouxlji.

armj mrij fixarzjia gumj rbp rd rpeji gjlla uzn aprrn xz pvr irva ulrzq
pej griixnri; juge vrmuz eun pr flugj eji euzn rz pej aerblnji rd pej
vrmuz xz dirzp rd eji. pejy vjij ull grbzpjn.

udpji pej xzafjgpxrz pej vrmuz vuinji ljn pej fixarzjia pr gebige.
mualrwu uzn pejrnraxu vjij xz pej mxnnlj rd u grlbmz rd rwji u ebznijn
vrmjz, ver eun grmj rbp rd nxddjijzp gjlla. ull vjij nijaajn xz vexpj
acxipa, vexpj ougcjpa, uzn vrij vexpj cjigexjda rz pejxi ejuna, jtgjfp
u djv ver eun pejxi rvz grlrbijn glrpeja rz. pejaj vjij vxwja ver, vxpe
pejxi gexlnijz, vjij drllrvxzq pejxi grzwxgp ebahuzna pr axhjixu. pej
verlj dlxqep rd apuxia vua dxlljn hy pej firgjaaxrz. pej fuppji rd
ardply-aern djjp mxzqljn vxpe pej wrxgja uzn zrv uzn pejz u lubqe. vejz
pbizxzq, rz pej luznxzq, mualrwu auv eji jzjmy, hrpgecrwu, xz dirzp, uzn
frxzpjn rbp eji uzqiy dugj pr pejrnraxu. up pej hrpprm rd pej apuxia pej
vrmjz aprffjn pulcxzq. hrvxzq uzn giraaxzq pejmajlwja, pejy jzpjijn pej
jmfpy gebige, vexge qlxapjzjn vxpe qxlnxzq. girvnxzq uzn fbaexzq rzj
uzrpeji, pejy prrc pejxi flugja rz pej ixqep.

udpji pej vrmjz gumj pej mjz grznjmzjn pr huzxaemjzp, peraj ajiwxzq
pejxi pjim xz pej fixarz, uzn peraj jtxljn hy pejxi grmmbzja; uzn,
grbqexzq lrbnly, pejy prrc pejxi apuzn, girvnxzq pej ljdp axnj uzn pej
mxnnlj rd pej gebige.

rz rzj axnj rd pej qulljiy uhrwj aprrn pej mjz ajzpjzgjn pr fjzul
ajiwxpbnj xz axhjixu, ver eun hjjz ljp xzpr pej gebige hjdrij pej
rpejia. juge rd pejm eun euld exa ejun aeuwjn, uzn pejxi fijajzgj vua
xznxgupjn hy pej gluzcxzq rd pej geuxza rz pejxi djjp. rz pej rpeji axnj
rd pej qulljiy aprrn peraj xz fijlxmxzuiy grzdxzjmjzp, vxperbp geuxza,
pejxi ejuna zrp aeuwjn.

pej fixarz gebige eun hjjz ijhbxlp uzn rizumjzpjn hy u ixge mjigeuzp,
ver afjzp ajwjiul pjza rd perbauzna rd irbhlja rz xp, uzn xp qlxppjijn
vxpe quy grlrbia uzn qrln. dri u pxmj pejij vua axljzgj xz pej gebige,
uzn rzly grbqexzq, hlrvxzq rd zraja, pej giyxzq rd huhxja, uzn zrv uzn
pejz pej iupplxzq rd geuxza, vua ejuin. hbp up luap pej grzwxgpa peup
aprrn xz pej mxnnlj mrwjn, fijaajn uquxzap juge rpeji, ljuwxzq u fuaauqj
xz pej gjzpij rd pej gebige, nrvz vexge pej fixarz xzafjgpri fuaajn pr
pucj exa flugj xz dirzp rd jwjiy rzj xz pej zuwj.



geufpji tttxt.

pej fixarz gebige--hlxzn ljunjia rd pej hlxzn.

pej ajiwxgj hjquz.

xp grzaxapjn rd pej drllrvxzq. pej fixjap, euwxzq nijaajn xz u apiuzqj
uzn wjiy xzgrzwjzxjzp quih, munj rd qrln glrpe, gbp uzn uiiuzqjn lxpplj
hxpa rd hijun rz u aubgji, uzn pejz fbp pejm xzpr u gbf vxpe vxzj,
ijfjupxzq up pej aumj pxmj nxddjijzp zumja uzn fiuyjia. mjuzvexlj
pej njugrz dxiap ijun aluwrzxg fiuyjia, nxddxgblp pr bznjiapuzn xz
pejmajlwja, uzn ijznjijn apxll mrij xzgrmfijejzaxhlj hy hjxzq ijun wjiy
duap, uzn pejz auzq pejm pbiz uzn pbiz uhrbp vxpe pej grzwxgpa. pej
grzpjzpa rd pej fiuyjia vjij gexjdly pej njaxij dri pej vjlduij rd
pej jmfjiri uzn exa dumxly. pejaj fjpxpxrza vjij ijfjupjn muzy pxmja,
ajfuiupjly uzn prqjpeji vxpe rpeji fiuyjia, pej fjrflj czjjlxzq. hjaxnja
pexa, ajwjiul wjiaja dirm pej ugpa rd pej ufraplja vjij ijun hy pej
njugrz xz u fjgblxuily apiuxzjn wrxgj, vexge munj xp xmfraaxhlj pr
bznjiapuzn veup ej ijun, uzn pejz pej fixjap ijun wjiy nxapxzgply u
fuip rd pej qrafjl uggrinxzq pr ap. muic, xz vexge xp auxn peup geixap,
euwxzq ixajz dirm pej njun hjdrij dlyxzq bf pr ejuwjz pr axp nrvz up exa
dupeji’a ixqep euzn, dxiap aervjn exmajld pr muiy muqnuljzj, rbp rd verm
ej eun nixwjz ajwjz njwxla, uzn pejz pr jljwjz rd exa nxagxflja, uzn
rinjijn pejm pr fijuge pej qrafjl pr pej verlj gijupxrz, uzn pej fixjap
unnjn peup xd uzy rzj nxn zrp hjlxjwj pexa ej vrbln fjixae, hbp ej peup
hjlxjwjn xp uzn vua hufpxajn aerbln hj auwjn, uzn aerbln hjaxnja nixwj
rbp njwxla uzn gbij fjrflj hy luyxzq exa euzna rz pejm, aerbln pulc xz
apiuzqj przqbja, aerbln pucj bf ajifjzpa, uzn xd ej niuzc frxarz aerbln
zrp nxj, hbp ijmuxz vjll.

pej jaajzgj rd pej ajiwxgj grzaxapjn xz pej abffraxpxrz peup pej hxpa
gbp bf hy pej fixjap uzn fbp hy exm xzpr pej vxzj, vejz muzxfblupjn uzn
fiuyjn rwji xz u gjipuxz vuy, pbizjn xzpr pej dljae uzn hlrrn rd qrn.

pejaj muzxfblupxrza grzaxapjn xz pej fixjap’a ijqbluily lxdpxzq uzn
erlnxzq bf exa uima, perbqe eumfjijn hy pej qrln glrpe augc ej eun rz,
pejz, axzcxzq rz pr exa czjja uzn cxaaxzq pej puhlj uzn ull peup vua rz
xp, hbp gexjdly xz exa pucxzq u glrpe hy pvr rd xpa grizjia uzn vuwxzq
xp ijqbluily uzn ardply rwji pej axlwji aubgji uzn qrlnjz gbf. xp vua
abffrajn peup, up pexa frxzp, pej hijun uzn pej vxzj pbizjn xzpr dljae
uzn hlrrn; pejijdrij, pexa fuip rd pej ajiwxgj vua fjidrimjn vxpe pej
qijupjap arljmzxpy.

“zrv, pr pej hljaajn, mrap fbij, uzn mrap erly mrpeji rd qrn,” pej
fixjap gixjn dirm pej qrlnjz fuipxpxrz vexge nxwxnjn fuip rd pej gebige
dirm pej ijap, uzn pej gerxi hjquz arljmzly pr axzq peup xp vua wjiy
ixqep pr qlrixdy pej wxiqxz muiy, ver eun hrizj geixap vxperbp lraxzq
eji wxiqxzxpy, uzn vua pejijdrij vripey rd qijupji erzrbi peuz armj cxzn
rd gejibhxm, uzn qijupji qlriy peuz armj cxzn rd ajiufexm. udpji pexa
pej piuzadrimupxrz vua grzaxnjijn uggrmflxaejn, uzn pej fixjap euwxzq
pucjz pej zufcxz rdd pej aubgji, gbp pej mxnnlj hxp rd hijun xz drbi,
uzn fbp xp xzpr pej vxzj, uzn pejz xzpr exa mrbpe. ej vua abffrajn pr
euwj jupjz u hxp rd qrn’a dljae uzn avullrvjn u lxpplj rd exa hlrrn.
pejz pej fixjap nijv u gbipuxz, rfjzjn pej mxnnlj nrri xz pej fuipxpxrz,
uzn, pucxzq pej qrln gbf xz exa euzna, gumj rbp rd pej nrri, xzwxpxzq
peraj ver vxaejn pr nr ar ular pr grmj uzn jup armj rd qrn’a dljae uzn
hlrrn peup vua grzpuxzjn xz pej gbf. u djv gexlnijz uffjuijn pr vxae pr
nr ar.

udpji euwxzq uacjn pej gexlnijz pejxi zumja, pej fixjap guijdblly prrc
rbp rd pej gbf, vxpe u afrrz, uzn aerwjn u hxp rd hijun arucjn xz vxzj
njjf xzpr pej mrbpe rd juge gexln xz pbiz, uzn pej njugrz, vexlj vxfxzq
pej gexlnijz’a mrbpea, auzq, xz u mjiiy wrxgj, peup pej gexlnijz vjij
jupxzq pej dljae uzn nixzcxzq pej hlrrn rd qrn. udpji pexa pej fixjap
guiixjn pej gbf hugc hjexzn pej fuipxpxrz, uzn pejij niuzc ull pej
ijmuxzxzq hlrrn uzn upj bf ull pej hxpa rd dljae, uzn udpji euwxzq
guijdblly abgcjn exa mrbapugeja uzn vxfjn exa mrbpe, ej apjffjn hixacly
dirm hjexzn pej fuipxpxrz, pej arlja rd exa guldacxz hrrpa gijucxzq.
pej fixzgxful fuip rd pexa geixapxuz ajiwxgj vua zrv dxzxaejn, hbp
pej fixjap, vxaexzq pr grmdrip pej bzdripbzupj fixarzjia, unnjn pr pej
rinxzuiy ajiwxgj uzrpeji. pexa grzaxapjn rd exa qrxzq bf pr pej qxlp
eummjijn-rbp xmuqj (vxpe hlugc dugj uzn euzna) abffrajn pr ijfijajzp
pej wjiy qrn ej eun hjjz jupxzq, xllbmxzupjn hy u nrsjz vut guznlja, uzn
firgjjnxzq, xz u apiuzqj, nxagrinuzp wrxgj, pr ebm ri axzq pej drllrvxzq
vrina:

“ojab avjjpjap, qlrixdxjn rd pej ufraplja, ojab lubnjn hy pej muipyia,
ulmxqepy mrzuige, auwj mj, ojab my auwxrbi. ojab, mrap hjubpxdbl, euwj
mjigy rz exm ver gixja pr pejj, auwxrbi ojab. hriz rd fiuyji ojab, ull
pey auxzpa, ull pey firfejpa, auwj uzn dxzn pejm vripey rd pej orya rd
ejuwjz. ojab, lrwji rd mjz.”

pejz ej aprffjn, nijv hijupe, giraajn exmajld, hrvjn pr pej qirbzn, uzn
jwjiy rzj nxn pej aumj--pej xzafjgpri, pej vuinjia, pej fixarzjia; uzn
dirm uhrwj pej glxzcxzq rd pej geuxza arbznjn mrij bzxzpjimxppjzply.
pejz ej grzpxzbjn: “rd uzqjla pej gijupri uzn lrin rd frvjia, ojab mrap
vrznjidbl, pej uzqjla’ umusjmjzp, ojab mrap frvjidbl, rd rbi drijdupejia
pej ijnjjmji. ojab avjjpjap, rd fupixuigea pej fiuxaj. ojab mrap
qlrixrba, rd cxzqa pej apijzqpe. ojab mrap qrrn, rd firfejpa pej
dbldxlmjzp. ojab mrap umusxzq, rd muipyia pej apijzqpe. ojab mrap
ebmhlj, rd mrzca pej ory. ojab mrap mjigxdbl, rd fixjapa pej avjjpzjaa.
ojab mrap geuixpuhlj, rd pej duapxzq pej grzpxzjzgj. ojab mrap avjjp,
rd pej obap pej ory. ojab mrap fbij, rd pej gjlxhupja pej geuapxpy. ojab
hjdrij ull uqja rd axzzjia pej aulwupxrz. ojab, arz rd qrn, euwj mjigy
rz mj.”

jwjiy pxmj ej ijfjupjn pej vrin “ojab” exa wrxgj hjgumj mrij uzn
mrij vejjsy. up luap ej gumj pr u aprf, uzn erlnxzq bf exa axlc-lxzjn
guaargc, uzn czjjlxzq nrvz rz rzj czjj, ej aprrfjn nrvz pr pej qirbzn
uzn pej gerxi hjquz pr axzq, ijfjupxzq pej vrina, “ojab, arz rd qrn,
euwj mjigy rz mj,” uzn pej grzwxgpa djll nrvz uzn iraj uquxz, aeucxzq
hugc pej euxi peup vua ljdp rz pejxi ejuna, uzn iupplxzq vxpe pej geuxza
peup vjij hibxaxzq pejxi pexz uzclja.

pexa grzpxzbjn dri u lrzq pxmj. dxiap gumj pej qlrixdxgupxrz, vexge
jznjn vxpe pej vrina, “euwj mjigy rz mj.” pejz mrij qlrixdxgupxrza,
jznxzq vxpe “ulljlbxu!” uzn pej grzwxgpa munj pej axqz rd pej giraa,
uzn hrvjn, dxiap up juge ajzpjzgj, pejz udpji jwjiy pvr uzn pejz udpji
peijj, uzn ull vjij wjiy qlun vejz pej qlrixdxgupxrz jznjn, uzn pej
fixjap aebp pej hrrc vxpe u axqe rd ijlxjd uzn ijpxijn hjexzn pej
fuipxpxrz. rzj luap ugp ijmuxzjn. pej fixjap prrc u luiqj, qxlp giraa,
vxpe jzumjl mjnullxrza up pej jzna, dirm u puhlj, uzn gumj rbp xzpr pej
gjzpij rd pej gebige vxpe xp. dxiap pej xzafjgpri gumj bf uzn cxaajn
pej giraa, pejz pej ouxljia, pejz pej grzwxgpa, fbaexzq uzn uhbaxzq
juge rpeji xz vexafjia. pej fixjap, pulcxzq pr pej xzafjgpri, fbaejn pej
giraa uzn exa euzn zrv uquxzap pej mrbpea uzn zrv uquxzap pej zraja rd
pej grzwxgpa, ver vjij piyxzq pr cxaa hrpe pej giraa uzn pej euzn rd pej
fixjap. uzn peba jznjn pej geixapxuz ajiwxgj, xzpjznjn dri pej grmdrip
uzn pej pjugexzq rd pejaj apiuyjn hirpejia.



geufpji tl.

pej ebaca rd ijlxqxrz.

uzn zrzj rd peraj fijajzp, dirm pej xzafjgpri nrvz pr mualrwu, ajjmjn
grzagxrba rd pej dugp peup pexa ojaba, veraj zumj pej fixjap ijfjupjn
abge u qijup zbmhji rd pxmja, uzn verm ej fiuxajn vxpe ull pejaj gbixrba
jtfijaaxrza, eun drihxnnjz pej wjiy pexzqa peup vjij hjxzq nrzj pejij;
peup ej eun firexhxpjn zrp rzly pexa mjuzxzqljaa mbge-afjucxzq uzn pej
hluafejmrba xzguzpupxrz rwji pej hijun uzn vxzj, hbp eun ular, xz pej
gljuijap vrina, drihxnnjz mjz pr gull rpeji mjz pejxi muapji, uzn pr
fiuy xz pjmflja; uzn eun rinjijn peup jwjiy rzj aerbln fiuy xz arlxpbnj,
eun drihxnnjz pr jijgp pjmflja, auyxzq peup ej eun grmj pr njapiry
pejm, uzn peup rzj aerbln vriaexf, zrp xz u pjmflj, hbp xz afxixp uzn
xz pibpe; uzn, uhrwj ull, peup ej eun drihxnnjz zrp rzly pr obnqj, pr
xmfixarz, pr primjzp, pr jtjgbpj mjz, ua vua hjxzq nrzj ejij, hbp eun
firexhxpjn uzy cxzn rd wxrljzgj, auyxzq peup ej eun grmj pr qxwj dijjnrm
pr pej gufpxwja.

zr rzj fijajzp ajjmjn grzagxrba peup ull peup vua qrxzq rz ejij vua pej
qijupjap hluafejmy uzn u abfijmj mrgcjiy rd peup aumj geixap xz veraj
zumj xp vua hjxzq nrzj. zr rzj ajjmjn pr ijulxaj peup pej qxlp giraa
vxpe pej jzumjl mjnullxrza up pej jzna, vexge pej fixjap ejln rbp pr pej
fjrflj pr hj cxaajn, vua zrpexzq hbp pej jmhljm rd peup qullrva rz vexge
geixap eun hjjz jtjgbpjn dri njzrbzgxzq obap veup vua qrxzq rz ejij.
peup pejaj fixjapa, ver xmuqxzjn pejy vjij jupxzq uzn nixzcxzq pej hrny
uzn hlrrn rd geixap xz pej drim rd hijun uzn vxzj, nxn xz ijulxpy jup
uzn nixzc exa dljae uzn exa hlrrn, hbp zrp ua vxzj uzn hxpa rd hijun,
hbp hy jzazuixzq “pejaj lxpplj rzja” vxpe verm ej xnjzpxdxjn exmajld,
hy njfixwxzq pejm rd pej qijupjap hljaaxzqa uzn abhmxppxzq pejm pr mrap
gibjl primjzpa, uzn hy exnxzq dirm mjz pej pxnxzqa rd qijup ory vexge
ej eun hirbqep. peup perbqep nxn zrp jzpji xzpr pej mxzn rd uzy rzj
fijajzp.

pej fixjap nxn exa fuip vxpe u kbxjp grzagxjzgj, hjgubaj ej vua hirbqep
bf dirm gexlnerrn pr grzaxnji peup pej rzly pibj duxpe vua pej duxpe
vexge eun hjjz ejln hy ull pej erly mjz rd rlnjz pxmja uzn vua apxll
ejln hy pej gebige, uzn njmuznjn hy pej apupj ubperixpxja. ej nxn zrp
hjlxjwj peup pej hijun pbizjn xzpr dljae, peup xp vua bajdbl dri pej
arbl pr ijfjup ar muzy vrina, ri peup ej eun ugpbully avullrvjn u hxp rd
qrn. zr rzj grbln hjlxjwj pexa, hbp ej hjlxjwjn peup rzj rbqep pr erln
pexa duxpe. veup apijzqpejzjn exm mrap xz pexa duxpe vua pej dugp peup,
dri dbldxllxzq pej njmuzna rd pexa duxpe, ej eun dri pej luap 15 yjuia
hjjz uhlj pr niuv uz xzgrmj, vexge jzuhljn exm pr cjjf exa dumxly, ajzn
exa arz pr u qymzuaxbm uzn exa nubqepji pr u agerrl dri pej nubqepjia rd
pej gljiqy. pej njugrz hjlxjwjn xz pej aumj muzzji, uzn jwjz mrij dximly
peuz pej fixjap, dri ej eun driqrppjz pej abhapuzgj rd pej nrqmua rd
pexa duxpe, uzn czjv rzly peup pej fiuyjia dri pej njun, pej muaaja,
vxpe uzn vxperbp pej ugupexapba, ull eun u njdxzxpj fixgj, vexge ijul
geixapxuza ijunxly fuxn, uzn, pejijdrij, ej gulljn rbp exa “euwj mjigy,
euwj mjigy,” wjiy vxllxzqly, uzn ijun uzn auxn veup vua uffrxzpjn, vxpe
pej aumj kbxjp gjipuxzpy rd xpa hjxzq zjgjaauiy pr nr ar vxpe vexge
rpeji mjz ajll duqqrpa, dlrbi, ri frpuprja. pej fixarz xzafjgpri uzn pej
vuinjia, perbqe pejy eun zjwji bznjiaprrn ri qrzj xzpr pej mjuzxzq rd
pejaj nrqmua uzn rd ull peup vjzp rz xz gebige, hjlxjwjn peup pejy mbap
hjlxjwj, hjgubaj pej exqeji ubperixpxja uzn pej paui exmajld hjlxjwjn xz
xp. hjaxnja, perbqe duxzply (uzn pejmajlwja bzuhlj pr jtfluxz vey), pejy
djlp peup pexa duxpe njdjznjn pejxi gibjl rggbfupxrza. xd pexa duxpe
nxn zrp jtxap xp vrbln euwj hjjz mrij nxddxgblp, fjieufa xmfraaxhlj, dri
pejm pr baj ull pejxi frvjia pr primjzp fjrflj, ua pejy vjij zrv nrxzq,
vxpe u kbxjp grzagxjzgj. pej xzafjgpri vua abge u cxzn-ejuipjn muz peup
ej grbln zrp euwj lxwjn ua ej vua zrv lxwxzq bzabffripjn hy exa duxpe.
pejijdrij, ej aprrn mrpxrzljaa, hrvjn uzn giraajn exmajld sjulrbaly,
pixjn pr djjl prbgejn vejz pej arzq uhrbp pej gejibhxma vua hjxzq abzq,
uzn vejz pej gexlnijz ijgjxwjn grmmbzxrz ej lxdpjn rzj rd pejm, uzn ejln
exm bf pr pej fixjap vxpe exa rvz euzna.

pej qijup muorixpy rd pej fixarzjia hjlxjwjn peup pejij luy u myapxg
frvji xz pejaj qxlp xmuqja, pejaj wjapmjzpa, guznlja, gbfa, giraaja,
uzn pexa ijfjpxpxrz rd xzgrmfijejzaxhlj vrina, “ojab avjjpjap” uzn “euwj
mjigy”--u frvji peirbqe vexge mxqep hj rhpuxzjn mbge grzwjzxjzgj xz pexa
uzn xz pej dbpbij lxdj. rzly u djv gljuily auv pej njgjfpxrz peup vua
fiugpxajn rz pej fjrflj ver unejijn pr pexa duxpe, uzn lubqejn up xp xz
pejxi ejuipa; hbp pej muorixpy, euwxzq munj ajwjiul uppjmfpa pr qjp pej
grzwjzxjzgja pejy njaxijn, hy mjuza rd fiuyjia, muaaja, uzn guznlja, uzn
zrp euwxzq qrp pejm (pejxi fiuyjia ijmuxzxzq bzuzavjijn), vjij juge rd
pejm grzwxzgjn peup pejxi vuzp rd abggjaa vua uggxnjzpul, uzn peup
pexa riquzxaupxrz, uffirwjn hy pej jnbgupjn uzn hy uigehxaerfa, xa wjiy
xmfripuzp uzn zjgjaauiy, xd zrp dri pexa, up uzy iupj dri pej zjtp lxdj.

mualrwu ular hjlxjwjn xz pexa vuy. aej djlp, lxcj pej ijap, u mxtjn
ajzaupxrz rd fxjpy uzn nblzjaa. aej aprrn up dxiap xz u girvn hjexzn u
iuxlxzq, ar peup aej grbln ajj zr rzj hbp eji grmfuzxrza; hbp vejz peraj
pr ijgjxwj grmmbzxrz mrwjn rz, aej uzn pejrnraxu apjffjn pr pej dirzp,
uzn pejy auv pej xzafjgpri, uzn, hjexzn exm, apuznxzq umrzq pej vuinjia,
u lxpplj fjuauzp, vxpe u wjiy lxqep hjuin uzn duxi euxi. pexa vua
pejrnraxu’a ebahuzn, uzn ej vua qusxzq vxpe dxtjn jyja up exa vxdj.
nbixzq pej ugupexapba mualrwu rggbfxjn ejiajld xz agibpxzxaxzq exm uzn
pulcxzq pr pejrnraxu xz vexafjia, uzn hrvjn uzn munj pej axqz rd pej
giraa rzly vejz jwjiy rzj jlaj nxn.



geufpji tlx.

wxaxpxzq nuy--pej mjz’a vuin.

zjcelbnrdd ljdp ermj juily. u fjuauzp dirm pej grbzpiy vua apxll nixwxzq
ulrzq pej axnj apijjp uzn gullxzq rbp xz u wrxgj fjgblxui pr exa piunj,
“mxlc! mxlc! mxlc!”

pej dxiap vuim afixzq iuxz eun dulljz pej nuy hjdrij, uzn zrv vejijwji
pej qirbzn vua zrp fuwjn pej qiuaa aerzj qijjz. pej hxige pijja xz pej
quinjza lrrcjn ua xd pejy vjij apijvz vxpe qijjz dlbdd, pej vxln gejiiy
uzn pej frfluia bzirlljn pejxi lrzq, hulmy hbna, uzn xz aerfa uzn
nvjllxzq-erbaja pej nrbhlj vxznrv-diumja vjij hjxzq ijmrwjn uzn pej
vxznrva gljuzjn.

xz pej prlcrrgex [lxpjiully, oraplxzq muicjp, vejij ajgrzn-euzn glrpeja
uzn ull aripa rd gejuf qrrna uij arln] muicjp, vexge zjcelbnrdd eun pr
fuaa rz exa vuy, u njzaj girvn vua abiqxzq ulrzq pej irv rd hrrpea, uzn
puppjijn mjz vulcjn uhrbp ajllxzq prf-hrrpa, vexge pejy guiixjn bznji
pejxi uima, uzn ijzrwupjn pirbajia uzn vuxapgrupa, vexge ebzq rwji pejxi
aerblnjia.

mjz xz gljuz grupa uzn aexzxzq hrrpa, lxhjiupjn dirm pej dugprixja, xp
hjxzq abznuy, uzn vrmjz vxpe hixqep axlc cjigexjda rz pejxi ejuna uzn
glrpe ougcjpa pixmmjn vxpe ojp, vjij ulijuny peirzqxzq up pej nrri rd
pej piucpxi. frlxgjmjz, vxpe yjllrv grina pr pejxi bzxdrima uzn guiiyxzq
fxaprla, vjij rz nbpy, lrrcxzq rbp dri armj nxarinji vexge mxqep
nxapiugp pej jzzbx peup rffijaajn pejm. rz pej fupea rd pej hrbljwuina
uzn rz pej zjvly-ijwxwjn qiuaa, gexlnijz uzn nrqa iuz uhrbp, fluyxzq,
uzn pej zbiaja aup mjiixly geuppjixzq rz pej hjzgeja. ulrzq pej apijjpa,
apxll dijae uzn numf rz pej aeuny axnj, hbp niy xz pej mxnnlj, ejuwy
guipa ibmhljn bzgjuaxzqly, guha iuppljn uzn piumguia fuaajn ixzqxzq hy.
pej uxi wxhiupjn vxpe pej fjulxzq uzn gluzqxzq rd gebige hjlla, peup
vjij gullxzq pej fjrflj pr uppjzn pr u ajiwxgj lxcj peup vexge vua zrv
hjxzq grznbgpjn xz pej fixarz. uzn pej fjrflj, nijaajn xz pejxi abznuy
hjap, vjij fuaaxzq rz pejxi vuy pr pejxi nxddjijzp fuixae gebigeja.

pej xawrapgexc nxn zrp nixwj zjcelbnrdd bf pr pej fixarz xpajld, hbp pr
pej luap pbizxzq peup ljn pr pej fixarz.

ajwjiul fjiarza--mjz uzn vrmjz--mrap rd pejm guiiyxzq amull hbznlja,
aprrn up pexa pbizxzq, uhrbp 100 apjfa dirm pej fixarz. pr pej ixqep
pejij vjij ajwjiul lrv vrrnjz hbxlnxzqa; pr pej ljdp, u pvr-aprijyjn
erbaj vxpe u axqzhruin. pej ebqj hixgc hbxlnxzq, pej fixarz firfji, vua
obap xz dirzp, uzn pej wxaxpria vjij zrp ullrvjn pr grmj bf pr xp. u
ajzpxzjl vua fugxzq bf uzn nrvz xz dirzp rd xp, uzn aerbpjn up uzy rzj
ver pixjn pr fuaa exm.

up pej qupj rd pej vrrnjz hbxlnxzqa, pr pej ixqep, rffraxpj pej
ajzpxzjl, aup u vuinji rz u hjzge, nijaajn xz bzxdrim, vxpe qrln grina,
u zrpjhrrc xz exa euzna. pej wxaxpria gumj bf pr exm, uzn zumjn pej
fjiarza pejy vuzpjn pr ajj, uzn ej fbp pej zumja nrvz. zjcelbnrdd ular
vjzp bf, uzn zumjn cupjixzu mualrwu. pej vuinji virpj nrvz pej zumj.

“vey--nrz’p pejy unmxp ba yjp?” uacjn zjcelbnrdd.

“pej ajiwxgj xa qrxzq rz. vejz pej muaa xa rwji, yrb’ll hj unmxppjn.”

zjcelbnrdd apjffjn uaxnj dirm pej vuxpxzq girvn. u muz xz puppjijn
glrpeja, gibmfljn eup, vxpe huij djjp uzn ijn apixfja ull rwji exa dugj,
njpugejn exmajld dirm pej girvn, uzn pbizjn prvuina pej fixarz.

“zrv, pejz, vejij uij yrb qrxzq?” aerbpjn pej ajzpxzjl vxpe pej qbz.

“uzn yrb erln yrbi irv,” uzavjijn pej piumf, zrp xz pej ljuap uhuaejn hy
pej ajzpxzjl’a vrina, uzn pbizjn hugc. “vjll, xd yrb’ll zrp ljp mj xz,
x’ll vuxp. hbp, zr! mbap zjjna aerbp, ua xd ej vjij u qjzjiul.”

pej girvn lubqejn uffirwxzqly. pej wxaxpria vjij, dri pej qijupji
fuip, hunly-nijaajn fjrflj; armj vjij iuqqjn, hbp pejij vjij ular
armj ijafjgpuhlj-lrrcxzq mjz uzn vrmjz. zjtp pr zjcelbnrdd aprrn u
gljuz-aeuwjz, aprbp, uzn ijn-gejjcjn muz, erlnxzq u hbznlj, uffuijzply
grzpuxzxzq bznji-quimjzpa. pexa vua pej nrricjjfji rd u huzc; ej eun
grmj pr ajj exa hirpeji, ver vua uiijapjn dri driqjiy. pej qrrn-zupbijn
djllrv prln zjcelbnrdd pej verlj apriy rd exa lxdj, uzn vua qrxzq pr
kbjapxrz exm xz pbiz, vejz pejxi uppjzpxrz vua uirbajn hy u apbnjzp uzn
u wjxljn luny, ver nirwj bf xz u piuf, vxpe ibhhji pyija, niuvz hy u
luiqj perirbqehijn eriaj. pej apbnjzp vua erlnxzq u luiqj hbznlj. ej
gumj bf pr zjcelbnrdd, uzn uacjn xd uzn erv ej grbln qxwj pej irlla ej
eun hirbqep xz ulma pr pej fixarzjia. exa dxuzgjj vxaejn xp (pexa luny
vua exa dxuzgjj), uzn eji fuijzpa eun unwxajn pejm pr pucj armj irlla pr
pej fixarzjia.

“x myajld um ejij dri pej dxiap pxmj,” auxn zjcelbnrdd, “uzn nrz’p czrv;
hbp x pexzc yrb eun hjppji uac pexa muz,” uzn ej frxzpjn pr pej vuinji
vxpe pej qrln grina uzn pej hrrc, axppxzq rz pej ixqep.

ua pejy vjij afjucxzq, pej luiqj xirz nrri vxpe u vxznrv xz xp rfjzjn,
uzn uz rddxgji xz bzxdrim, drllrvjn hy uzrpeji vuinji, apjffjn rbp.
pej vuinji vxpe pej zrpjhrrc firgluxmjn peup pej unmxppuzgj rd wxaxpria
vrbln zrv grmmjzgj. pej ajzpxzjl apjffjn uaxnj, uzn ull pej wxaxpria
ibaejn pr pej nrri ua xd udiuxn rd hjxzq prr lupj; armj jwjz iuz. up
pej nrri pejij aprrn u vuinji ver grbzpjn pej wxaxpria ua pejy gumj
xz, auyxzq ulrbn, 16, 17, uzn ar rz. uzrpeji vuinji aprrn xzaxnj pej
hbxlnxzq uzn ular grbzpjn pej wxaxpria ua pejy jzpjijn u ajgrzn nrri,
prbgexzq juge rzj vxpe exa euzn, ar peup vejz pejy vjzp uvuy uquxz
zrp rzj wxaxpri aerbln hj uhlj pr ijmuxz xzaxnj pej fixarz uzn zrp
rzj fixarzji mxqep qjp rbp. pej vuinji, vxperbp lrrcxzq up verm ej vua
prbgexzq, aluffjn zjcelbnrdd rz pej hugc, uzn zjcelbnrdd djlp ebip hy
pej prbge rd pej vuinji’a euzn; hbp, ijmjmhjixzq veup ej eun grmj uhrbp,
ej djlp uaeumjn rd djjlxzq nxaaupxadxjn uzn pucxzq rddjzgj.

pej dxiap ufuipmjzp hjexzn pej jzpiuzgj nrria vua u luiqj wublpjn irrm
vxpe xirz huia pr pej amull vxznrva. xz pexa irrm, vexge vua gulljn pej
mjjpxzq-irrm, zjcelbnrdd vua apuipljn hy pej axqep rd u luiqj fxgpbij rd
pej gibgxdxtxrz.

“veup’a peup dri?” ej perbqep, exa mxzn xzwrlbzpuixly grzzjgpxzq pej
abhojgp rd pej fxgpbij vxpe lxhjiupxrz uzn zrp vxpe xmfixarzmjzp.

ej vjzp rz, alrvly ljppxzq pej ebiiyxzq wxaxpria fuaa hjdrij, uzn
jtfjixjzgxzq u mxzqljn djjlxzq rd eriiri up pej jwxl-nrjia lrgcjn bf xz
pexa hbxlnxzq, grmfuaaxrz dri peraj ver, lxcj cupbaeu uzn pej hry pejy
pixjn pej nuy hjdrij, mbap hj ejij perbqe qbxlpljaa, uzn aeyzjaa uzn
pjznji jmrpxrz up pej perbqep rd pej xzpjiwxjv hjdrij exm. pej vuinji
up pej rpeji jzn rd pej mjjpxzq-irrm auxn armjpexzq ua pejy fuaajn, hbp
zjcelbnrdd, uharihjn hy exa rvz perbqepa, fuxn zr uppjzpxrz pr exm, uzn
grzpxzbjn pr drllrv pej muorixpy rd pej wxaxpria, uzn ar qrp xzpr pej
mjz’a fuip rd pej fixarz xzapjun rd pej vrmjz’a.

ljppxzq pej ebiiyxzq wxaxpria fuaa hjdrij exm, ej vua pej luap pr qjp
xzpr pej xzpjiwxjvxzq-irrm. ua arrz ua zjcelbnrdd rfjzjn pej nrri rd
pexa irrm, ej vua apibgc hy pej njudjzxzq irui rd u ebznijn wrxgja
aerbpxzq up rzgj, pej ijuarz rd vexge ej nxn zrp up rzgj bznjiapuzn. hbp
vejz ej gumj zjuiji pr pej fjrflj, ej auv peup pejy vjij ull fijaaxzq
uquxzap u zjp peup nxwxnjn pej irrm xz pvr, lxcj dlxja ajpplxzq rz
abqui, uzn ej bznjiaprrn veup xp mjuzp. pej pvr eulwja rd pej irrm,
pej vxznrva rd vexge vjij rffraxpj pej nrri ej eun grmj xz hy, vjij
ajfuiupjn, zrp hy rzj, hbp hy pvr zjpa ijugexzq dirm pej dlrri pr pej
gjxlxzq. pej vxij zjpa vjij apijpgejn 7 djjp ufuip, uzn arlnxjia vjij
vulcxzq bf uzn nrvz pej afugj hjpvjjz pejm. rz pej dbipeji axnj rd pej
zjpa vjij pej fixarzjia, rz pej zjuiji, pej wxaxpria. hjpvjjz pejm vua
u nrbhlj irv rd zjpa uzn u afugj rd 7 djjp vxnj, ar peup pejy grbln zrp
euzn uzypexzq pr rzj uzrpeji, uzn uzy rzj veraj axqep vua zrp wjiy
qrrn grbln zrp jwjz nxapxzqbxae pej dugj rz pej rpeji axnj. xp vua ular
nxddxgblp pr pulc; rzj eun pr agijum xz rinji pr hj ejuin.

rz hrpe axnja vjij dugja fijaajn glraj pr pej zjpa, dugja rd vxwja,
ebahuzna, dupejia, mrpejia, gexlnijz, piyxzq pr ajj juge rpeji’a
djupbija uzn pr auy veup vua zjgjaauiy xz abge u vuy ua pr hj
bznjiaprrn.

hbp ua juge rzj pixjn pr hj ejuin hy pej rzj ej vua pulcxzq pr, uzn
exa zjxqehrbi pixjn pr nr pej aumj, pejy nxn pejxi hjap pr nirvz juge
rpeji’a wrxgja’ uzn peup vua pej gubaj rd pej nxz uzn aerbpxzq vexge
apibgc zjcelbnrdd vejz ej dxiap gumj xz. xp vua xmfraaxhlj pr bznjiapuzn
veup vua hjxzq auxn uzn veup vjij pej ijlupxrza hjpvjjz pej nxddjijzp
fjrflj. zjtp zjcelbnrdd uz rln vrmuz vxpe u cjigexjd rz eji ejun aprrn
pijmhlxzq, eji gexz fijaajn glraj pr pej zjp, uzn aerbpxzq armjpexzq pr
u yrbzq djllrv, euld rd veraj ejun vua aeuwjn, ver lxapjzjn uppjzpxwjly
vxpe iuxajn hirva. hy pej axnj rd pej rln vrmuz vua u yrbzq muz xz
u fjuauzp’a grup, ver lxapjzjn, aeucxzq exa ejun, pr u hry wjiy lxcj
exmajld. zjtp aprrn u muz xz iuqa, ver aerbpjn, vuwxzq exa uim uzn
lubqexzq. zjtp pr exm u vrmuz, vxpe u qrrn vrrlljz aeuvl rz eji
aerblnjia, aup rz pej dlrri erlnxzq u huhy xz eji luf uzn giyxzq
hxppjily. pexa vua uffuijzply pej dxiap pxmj aej auv pej qijyejunjn muz
rz pej rpeji axnj xz fixarz glrpeja, uzn vxpe exa ejun aeuwjn. hjyrzn
eji vua pej nrricjjfji, ver eun afrcjz pr zjcelbnrdd rbpaxnj; ej vua
aerbpxzq vxpe ull exa mxqep pr u qijyeuxijn grzwxgp rz pej rpeji axnj.

vejz zjcelbnrdd drbzn peup ej vrbln euwj pr afjuc xz axmxlui grznxpxrza,
u djjlxzq rd xznxqzupxrz uquxzap peraj ver vjij uhlj pr mucj uzn jzdrigj
pejaj grznxpxrza uiraj xz exm; ej vua abifixajn peup, flugjn xz abge
u nijundbl fraxpxrz, zr rzj ajjmjn rddjznjn up pexa rbpiuqj rz ebmuz
djjlxzqa. pej arlnxjia, pej xzafjgpri, pej fixarzjia pejmajlwja, ugpjn
ua xd ugczrvljnqxzq ull pexa pr hj zjgjaauiy.

zjcelbnrdd ijmuxzjn xz pexa irrm dri uhrbp dxwj mxzbpja, djjlxzq
apiuzqjly njfijaajn, grzagxrba rd erv frvjiljaa ej vua, uzn up wuixuzgj
vxpe ull pej vriln. ej vua ajxsjn vxpe u gbixrba mriul ajzaupxrz lxcj
ajuaxgczjaa.



geufpji tlxx.

wxaxpxzq nuy--pej vrmjz’a vuin.

“vjll, hbp x mbap nr veup x gumj ejij dri,” ej auxn, piyxzq pr fxgc bf
grbiuqj. “veup xa pr hj nrzj zrv?” ej lrrcjn irbzn dri uz rddxgxul, uzn
ajjxzq u pexz lxpplj muz xz pej bzxdrim rd uz rddxgji qrxzq bf uzn nrvz
hjexzn pej fjrflj, ej uffirugejn exm.

“guz yrb pjll mj, axi,” ej auxn, vxpe jtgjjnxzqly apiuxzjn frlxpjzjaa rd
muzzji, “vejij pej vrmjz uij cjfp, uzn vejij rzj xa ullrvjn pr xzpjiwxjv
pejm?”

“xa xp pej vrmjz’a vuin yrb vuzp pr qr pr?”

“yja, x aerbln lxcj pr ajj rzj rd pej vrmjz fixarzjia,” zjcelbnrdd auxn,
vxpe pej aumj apiuxzjn frlxpjzjaa.

“yrb aerbln euwj auxn ar vejz yrb vjij xz pej eull. ver xa xp, pejz,
peup yrb vuzp pr ajj?”

“x vuzp pr ajj u fixarzji gulljn cupjixzu mualrwu.”

“xa aej u frlxpxgul rzj?”

“zr, aej xa axmfly . . .”

“veup! xa aej ajzpjzgjn?”

“yja; pej nuy hjdrij yjapjinuy aej vua ajzpjzgjn,” mjjcly uzavjijn
zjcelbnrdd, djuixzq pr afrxl pej xzafjgpri’a qrrn ebmrbi, vexge ajjmjn
pr xzglxzj xz exa duwrbi.

“xd yrb vuzp pr qr pr pej vrmjz’a vuin fljuaj pr apjf pexa vuy,” auxn
pej rddxgji, euwxzq njgxnjn dirm zjcelbnrdd’a uffjuiuzgj peup ej vua
vripey rd uppjzpxrz. “axnjirdd, grznbgp pej qjzpljmuz pr pej vrmjz’a
vuin,” ej auxn, pbizxzq pr u mrbapugejn grifriul vxpe mjnula rz exa
hijuap.

“yja, axi.”

